Project Gutenberg's A Day with Browning, by Anonymous and Robert Browning

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Day with Browning

Author: Anonymous
        Robert Browning

Release Date: August 8, 2012 [EBook #40440]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY WITH BROWNING ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







  [Illustration: A Day with Browning]


    "The Palazzo Giustiniani Recanati was a place of historical
    association and fifteenth-century traditions.... At three
    o'clock regularly, a friend's gondola, which was always at hand
    to convey him, came and carried him, usually, to the Lido,--his
    favourite spot."


  [Illustration: _Painting by E. W. Haslehust._
                 BROWNING'S HOUSE IN VENICE.]


  [Illustration: A DAY WITH THE POET BROWNING
                NEW YORK HODDER & STOUGHTON]


  _In the same Series._

  _Longfellow._
  _Tennyson._
  _Keats._
  _Wordsworth._
  _Burns._
  _Scott._
  _Byron._
  _Shelley._




A DAY WITH BROWNING.


From his bed-room window in the Palazzo Giustiniani Recanati, every
morning in 1885, Robert Browning watched the sunrise. "My window
commands a perfect view," he wrote, "the still, grey lagoon, the few
seagulls flying, the islet of San Giorgio in deep shadow, and the
clouds in a long purple rack, from behind which a sort of spirit of
rose burns up, till presently all the rims are on fire with gold....
So my day begins."

The Palazzo, in which a suite of rooms had been placed by Mrs. Bronson
at the disposal of the poet and his sister, was a place of historical
association and fifteenth-century traditions. And no more appropriate
abiding-place than Venice could have been selected for a man of
Browning's temperament. The Venetian colouring was a perpetual feast
to his eye: its mediæval glories were a source of continual
inspiration. And if much of his heart still remained with his native
land, so that the London daily papers were a necessity of existence,
and a certain sense of exile occasionally obtruded itself, we must
needs be grateful to that fact for its result in certain immortal
lines:

    Oh, to be in England
    Now that April's there,
    And whoever wakes in England
    Sees, some morning, unaware,
    That the lowest boughs and the brush-wood sheaf
    Round the elm-tree bole are in tiny leaf,
    While the chaffinch sings on the orchard bough
    In England--now!

    And after April, when May follows,
    And the whitethroat builds, and all the swallows!
    Hark! where my blossomed pear-tree in the hedge
    Leans to the field and scatters on the clover
    Blossoms and dewdrops--at the bent-spray's edge--
    That's the wise thrush; he sings each song twice over,
    Lest you should think he never could recapture
    The first fine careless rapture!
    And though the fields look rough with hoary dew,
    All will be gay when noontide wakes anew
    The buttercups, the little children's dower,
    --Far brighter than this gaudy melon-flower!

But there had always been a frankly cosmopolitan spirit in
Browning,--no touch of parochialism or insularity. In the magnificent
gallery of portrait studies, no two alike, which his poems present to
us, the nationalities are legion. Yet Italian scenes predominate; for
Browning could gauge, with the unerring instinct of genius, all the
subtleties of the Italian temperament. So we come, at every turn,
across some ardent vision of the South,--here, Waring sailing out of
Trieste under the furled lateen-sail; and there, Fra Lippo Lippi
tracking "lutestrings, laughs, and whifts of song" down the darkling
streets of Florence. The "Patriot," riding into Brescia, "roses, roses
all the way," and the Duke of Ferrara,--that "typical representative
of a whole phase of civilisation," discussing _My Last Duchess_ and
her foolishness.

    That's my last Duchess painted on the wall,
    Looking as if she were alive; I call
    That piece a wonder, now: Frà Pandolf's hands
    Worked busily a day, and there she stands.
    Will't please you sit and look at her? I said
    "Frà Pandolf" by design, for never read
    Strangers like you that pictured countenance,
    The depth and passion of its earnest glance,
    But to myself they turned (since none puts by
    The curtain I have drawn for you, but I)
    And seemed as they would ask me, if they durst,
    How such a glance came there; so, not the first
    Are you to turn and ask thus. Sir, 'twas not
    Her husband's presence only, called that spot
    Of joy into the Duchess' cheek: perhaps
    Frà Pandolf chanced to say "Her mantle laps
    Over my Lady's wrist too much," or "Paint
    Must never hope to reproduce the faint
    Half-flush that dies along her throat;" such stuff
    Was courtesy, she thought, and cause enough
    For calling up that spot of joy. She had
    A heart ... how shall I say? ... too soon made glad,
    Too easily impressed; she liked whate'er
    She looked on, and her looks went everywhere.
    Sir, 'twas all one! My favour at her breast,
    The dropping of the daylight in the West,
    The bough of cherries some officious fool
    Broke in the orchard for her, the white mule
    She rode with round the terrace--all and each
    Would draw from her alike the approving speech,
    Or blush, at least. She thanked men,--good; but thanked
    Somehow ... I know not how ... as if she ranked
    My gift of a nine-hundred-years-old name
    With anybody's gift.
                                        (_My Last Duchess._)

       *       *       *       *       *

    That's my last Duchess painted on the wall,
    Looking as if she were alive; I call
    That piece a wonder, now: Frà Pandolf's hands
    Worked busily a day, and there she stands.
    Will't please you sit and look at her? I said
    "Frà Pandolf" by design, for never read
    Strangers like you that pictured countenance,
    The depth and passion of its earnest glance,
    But to myself they turned (since none puts by
    The curtain I have drawn for you, but I)
    And seemed as they would ask me, if they durst,
    How such a glance came there.


[Illustration: _Painting by W. J. Neatby._ MY LAST DUCHESS.]


After a light and early breakfast--the poet, when abroad, lived almost
entirely on milk, fruit, etc., abjuring animal food--Browning would
follow his invariable custom, a stroll along the Riva to the public
gardens. He never failed to leave the house at the same hour of the
day: he was a man of singularly methodical habits in many ways. "Good
sense," it has been said, "was his foible, if not his habit": and an
orderly method of life was one of the strongest proofs of this fact:
another evidence lay in his care to avoid being _labelled_. The
disorderly locks and careless appearance of the typical poet were
quite alien to this well-groomed, cleanly-looking Englishman, with his
"sweet, grave face," silvery hair, and smooth, healthy skin.
Singularly wholesome in body as well as in mind, until past seventy he
could take the longest walks without fatigue; the splendid eyesight of
his clear grey eyes remained untarnished to the last. These keen grey
eyes of his never failed to notice anything worth seeing in his walks:
an extraordinary minuteness of observation is perceptible in all his
poems dealing with out-door life,--little touches of detail such as
few men are masters of:

    And the leaf-buds on the vine are woolly,
        I noticed that, to-day;
    One day more bursts them open fully,
        --You know the red turns grey.

                       (_The Lost Mistress._)

And again, those lines of poignant, passionate reserve, which sum up
_May and Death_:

    I wish that when you died last May,
        Charles, there had died along with you
    Three parts of spring's delightful things;
        Ay, and for me, the fourth part too.

    A foolish thought, and worse, perhaps!
        There must be many a pair of friends
    Who, arm in arm, deserve the warm
        Moon-births, and the long evening-ends.

    So, for their sake, be May still May!
        Let their new time, as mine of old,
    Do all it did for me: I bid
        Sweet sights and sounds throng manifold.

    Only, one little sight, one plant,
        Woods have in May, that starts up green
    Save a sole streak which, so to speak,
        Is spring's blood, spilt its leaves between,--

    That, they might spare; a certain wood
        Might miss the plant; their loss were small:
    But I,--whene'er the leaf grows there,
        Its drop comes from my heart, that's all.

Arrived at the public gardens, Browning was careful to visit his
"friends" there and to feed them--the elephant, baboon, kangaroo,
ostrich, pelican, and marmosets. He had that particular _camaraderie_
with wild animals which is almost akin to a hypnotic influence over
them: and when in the country, he would "whistle softly to the lizards
basking on the low walls which border the roads, to try his old power
of attracting them." Flowers he enjoyed as a colour-feast for the eye;
scenery he revelled in. In that perpetual contemplation of Nature,
which with Wordsworth became an all-absorbent passion, Browning had
but little share: his chief interest was in man. But "now and again
external nature was for him ... pierced and shot through with
spiritual fire."

Three times punctually he would walk round the gardens, and then walk
home. Upon these daily strolls he was accompanied by his sister
Sarianna: in whose love and companionship he was singularly fortunate.
Sarianna Browning had always been the best of sisters to the poet and
his wife,--a kindred spirit in every sense of the word; and she was
now intent to supply, so far as in her lay, the place of that "soul of
fire enclosed in a shell of pearl"--Elizabeth Barrett Browning. Of the
dead wife, who had been all-in-all to him, Browning seldom spoke in
words: but his burning need of her and hope of reunion with her
gleamed continually through his writings:

    "Oh, their Rafael of the dear Madonnas,
    Oh, their Dante of the dread Inferno,
    Wrote one song--and in my brain I sing it,
    Drew one angel--borne, see, on my bosom!"

And in all his poems which deal with the love of man and woman, "he
regarded the union of soul with soul as the capital achievement of
life." He thought of love "as a supreme possession in itself, and as a
revelation of infinite things which lie beyond it: as a test of
character, and even as a pledge of perpetual advance in the life of
the spirit." Hence, even where the shadow of death broods over a poem,
as we see it _In a Gondola_, that shadow "glows with colour like the
shadows of a Venetian painter." Love, to the very last, is infinitely
stronger than death.

       *       *       *       *       *

    I send my heart up to thee, all my heart,
        In this my singing.
    For the stars help me, and the sea bears part;
        The very night is clinging
    Closer to Venice' streets to leave one space
        Above me, whence thy face
    May light my joyous heart to thee its dwelling-place.


[Illustration: _Painting by W. Russell Flint._ IN A GONDOLA.]


    _He sings._

    I send my heart up to thee, all my heart
        In this my singing.
    For the stars help me, and the sea bears part;
        The very night is clinging
    Closer to Venice' streets to leave one space
        Above me, whence thy face
    May light my joyous heart to thee its dwelling-place.

    _She speaks._

    Say after me, and try to say
    My very words, as if each word
    Came from you of your own accord,
    In your own voice, in your own way:
    "This woman's heart and soul and brain
    Are mine as much as this gold chain
    She bids me wear; which," (say again)
    "I choose to make by cherishing
    A precious thing, or choose to fling
    Over the boat-side, ring by ring."
    And yet once more say ... no word more!
    Since words are only words. Give o'er!
    Unless you call me, all the same,
    Familiarly by my pet-name
    Which, if the Three should hear you call,
    And me reply to, would proclaim
    At once our secret to them all.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _She speaks._

    There's Zanze's vigilant taper; safe are we!
    Only one minute more to-night with me?
    Resume your past self of a month ago!
    Be you the bashful gallant, I will be
    The lady with the colder breast than snow:
    Now bow you, as becomes, nor touch my hand
    More than I touch yours when I step to land,
    And say, "All thanks, Siora!"--
            Heart to heart,
    And lips to lips! Yet once more, ere we part,
    Clasp me, and make me thine, as mine thou art!

    (_He is surprised and stabbed._)

    It was ordained to be so, Sweet,--and best
    Comes now, beneath thine eyes, and on thy breast.
    Still kiss me! Care not for the cowards! Care
    Only to put aside thy beauteous hair
    My blood will hurt! The Three, I do not scorn
    To death, because they never lived: but I
    Have lived indeed, and so--(yet one more kiss)--can die!
                                          (_In a Gondola._)

The latter hours of the morning were devoted by the poet to work,
proof-sheets, and correspondence. He would complain bitterly of the
quantity of "ephemeral correspondence" which took up so much of his
time: yet, with the rarest exceptions, he answered every letter he
received. He counted that day lost in which he had not written at
least a little. In earlier life he had worked fast and copiously, but
now he was satisfied with twenty or thirty lines as the result of a
morning's work. And upon these lines he expended infinite trouble;
for, despite all suppositions to the contrary, he finished his work
with great care. "People accuse me of not taking pains!" he grumbled,
"I take nothing _but_ pains!"

His subject-matter fell naturally into three groups of poems: those
interpreting love in its various phases, those occupied with art and
artists, those treating of religious ideas and emotions. And these
again may be subdivided into poems of failure and attainment: it is
hard to say which are which, for Browning was the singer of heroic
failures, and they, to him, were spiritual triumphs. He held that "we
fall to rise--are baffled to fight better,--sleep, to wake." No such
moral tonic has ever been proffered to the weary and dispirited as the
invulnerable optimism of Browning. He regarded this present life as a
state of probation and preparation; therefore, "his faith in the
unseen order of things created a hope which persists through all
apparent failure." The Miltonic ideal, "and what is else, not to be
overcome," is the core and centre of Browning's teaching. Sometimes it
refers to hopeless love, as in _The Last Ride Together_.

    I said--Then, Dearest, since 'tis so,
    Since now at length my fate I know,
    Since nothing all my love avails,
    Since all, my life seemed meant for, fails,
        Since this was written and needs must be--

    My whole heart rises up to bless
    Your name in pride and thankfulness!
    Take back the hope you gave,--I claim
    Only a memory of the same,
    --And this beside, if you will not blame,
        Your leave for one more last ride with me.

    My mistress bent that brow of hers;
    Those deep dark eyes where pride demurs
    When pity would be softening through,
    Fixed me a breathing-while or two
        With life or death in the balance: right!
    The blood replenished me again;
    My last thought was at least not vain:
    I and my mistress, side by side
    Shall be together, breathe and ride,
    So, one day more am I deified--
        Who knows but the world may end to-night?

Sometimes death, to all seeming, has shut the doors of hope for ever:

    Beautiful Evelyn Hope is dead!
        Sit and watch by her side an hour.
    That is her book-shelf, this her bed;
        She plucked that piece of geranium-flower,
    Beginning to die too in the glass;
        Little has yet been changed, I think:
    The shutters are shut, no light may pass
        Save two long rays thro' the hinge's chink.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Is it too late then, Evelyn Hope?
        What, your soul was pure and true,
    The good stars met in your horoscope,
        Made you of spirit, fire and dew--
    And, just because I was thrice as old
        And our paths in the world diverged so wide,
    Each was nought to each, must I be told?
        We were fellow-mortals, nought beside?

    No, indeed! for God above
        Is great to grant, as mighty to make,
    And creates the love to reward the love:
        I claim you still, for my own love's sake!
    Delayed it may be for more lives yet,
        Through worlds I shall traverse, not a few:
    Much is to learn and much to forget
        Ere the time be come for taking you.

    But the time will come,--at last it will,
        When, Evelyn Hope, what meant, I shall say,
    In the lower earth, in the years long still,
        That body and soul so pure and gay?
    Why your hair was amber, I shall divine,
        And your mouth of your own geranium's red--
    And what you would do with me, in fine,
        In the new life come in the old one's stead.

           *       *       *       *       *

    I loved you, Evelyn, all the while!
        My heart seemed full as it could hold--
    There was place and to spare for the frank young smile,
        And the red young mouth and the hair's young gold.
    So, hush,--I will give you this leaf to keep--
        See, I shut it inside the sweet cold hand.
    There, that is our secret! go to sleep;
        You will wake, and remember, and understand.

Or, again, the tragedy of ingratitude and crumbled aspirations
ends--as the world might say--upon the scaffold.

    It was roses, roses, all the way,
        With myrtle mixed in my path like mad:
    The house-roofs seemed to heave and sway,
        The church-spires flamed, such flags they had,
    A year ago on this very day!

           *       *       *       *       *

    There's nobody on the house-tops now--
        Just a palsied few at the windows set;
    For the best of the sight is, all allow,
        At the Shambles' Gate--or, better yet,
    By the very scaffold's foot, I trow.

    I go in the rain, and, more than needs,
        A rope cuts both my wrists behind;
    And I think, by the feel, my forehead bleeds,
        For they fling, whoever has a mind,
    Stones at me for my year's misdeeds.

    Thus I entered Brescia, and thus I go!
        In triumphs, people have dropped down dead.
    "Thou, paid by the World,--what dost thou owe
        Me?" God might question: but now instead,
    'Tis God shall requite! I am safer so.

In all these, as in _Childe Roland_, that forlorn romance of dreary
and depressed heroism, "the trumpet-note of the soul's victory rings
through the darkness of terrestrial defeat":

    Not hear? when noise was everywhere! it tolled
        Increasing like a bell. Names in my ears
        Of all the lost adventurers my peers,--
    How such a one was strong, and such was bold,
    And such was fortunate, yet each of old
        Lost, lost! one moment knelled the woe of years.

    There they stood, ranged along the hill-sides, met
        To view the last of me, a living frame
        For one more picture! in a sheet of flame
    I saw them and I knew them all. And yet
    Dauntless the slug-horn to my lips I set
        And blew, "_Childe  Roland to the Dark Tower came_."

... At noon, Browning would make a second and more substantial
breakfast on Italian dishes; and at three o'clock regularly, a
friend's gondola, which was always at hand to convey him, came and
carried him, usually, to the Lido,--his favourite spot. "I walk, even
in wind or rain," he wrote, "for a couple of hours on Lido, and enjoy
the break of sea on the strip of sand, as much as Shelley did in those
old days.... Go there,--if only to be blown about by the sea-wind!"
The sea-wind, indeed, was the very utterance of his own robust and
vigorous nature, his keen alertness of sense, and his impetuous,
impulsive spirit.

In the course of the afternoon, he would explore Venice in all
directions, studying her multitudinous points of interest and beauty.
The daughter of his hostess, Mrs. Bronson, sometimes companioned him
on these excursions, guiding him through the narrow by-streets, or
examining, with him, the monuments, sculptures and frescoes of the
churches.

Art, in its various manifestations, had been a life-long study with
Browning. He took great delight in modelling in clay, and had for some
while studied sculpture under Story. He possessed the artistic
temperament--fiery, nervous, susceptible--in its sanest form: and not
only was he able to express all an artist's aims, ambitions, and
despairs, but to arrive in all his poems, at one point or other, at a
superb pictorial moment. Some of his lines are penetrated from end to
end with this remarkable pictorial quality: perhaps the most notable
example is _Love Among the Ruins_, with its triple contrast,--the
infinite calm of the pasture-lands prolonging themselves into the
sunset, the noise and vital movement which had filled the
now-vanished city,--and the lover, endeavouring to curb his impatience
for the one beloved face by dwelling on these outward things:

       *       *       *       *       *

    And I know, while thus the quiet-coloured eve
              Smiles to leave
    To their folding, all our many-tinkling fleece
              In such peace,
    And the slopes and rills in undistinguished grey
              Melt away--
    That a girl with eager eyes and yellow hair
              Waits me there
    In the turret whence the charioteers caught soul
              For the goal,
    When the king looked, where she looks now, breathless, dumb
              Till I come.


[Illustration: _Painting by W. Russell Flint_. LOVE AMONG THE RUINS.]


    Where the quiet-coloured end of evening smiles
              Miles and miles
    On the solitary pastures where our sheep
              Half asleep
    Tinkle homeward thro' the twilight, stray or stop
              As they crop--

    Was the site once of a city great and gay,
              (So they say)
    Of our country's very capital, its prince
              Ages since
    Held his court in, gathered councils, wielding far
              Peace or war.

           *       *       *       *       *

    And I know, while thus the quiet-coloured eve
              Smiles to leave
    To their folding, all our many-tinkling fleece
              In such peace,
    And the slopes and rills in undistinguished grey
              Melt away--

    That a girl with eager eyes and yellow hair
              Waits me there
    In the turret whence the charioteers caught soul
              For the goal,
    When the king looked, where she looks now, breathless, dumb
              Till I come.

    But he looked upon the city, every side,
              Far and wide,
    All the mountains topped with temples, all the glades'
              Colonnades,
    All the causeys, bridges, aqueducts,--and then,
              All the men!

    When I do come, she will speak not, she will stand,
              Either hand
    On my shoulder, give her eyes the first embrace
              Of my face,
    Ere we rush, ere we extinguish sight and speech
              Each on each.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Oh heart! oh, blood that freezes, blood that burns!
              Earth's returns
    For whole centuries of folly, noise and sin!
              Shut them in,
    With their triumphs and their glories and the rest.
              Love is best!

Another characteristic of Browning was his consummate comprehension of
artistic ideals, those of temperaments so opposite as Fra Lippo Lippi,
_Pictor Ignotus_, and that too-perfect painter Andrea del Sarto. His
poem on the last-named was written and forwarded to a friend, who had
begged him to procure a copy of the Pitti portrait of Del Sarto and
his wife. It tells far more than any portrait could: and expresses the
writer's doctrine that in art, as in life, the aspiration toward the
higher is greater than the achievement of the lower: "A man's reach
should exceed his grasp, or what's heaven for?" According to
Browning's belief, a soul's probation, its growth, its ultimate value,
lie mainly if not wholly in this choice between the high and the less
high.

    ... Love, we are in God's hand.
    How strange now, looks the life He makes us lead!
    So free we seem, so fettered fast we are!
    I feel He laid the fetter: let it lie!
    This chamber for example--turn your head--
    All that's behind us! you don't understand
    Nor care to understand about my art,
    But you can hear at least when people speak;
    And that cartoon, the second from the door
    --It is the thing, Love! so such things should be--
    Behold Madonna, I am bold to say.
    I can do with my pencil what I know,
    What I see, what at bottom of my heart
    I wish for, if I ever wish so deep--
    Do easily, too--when I say perfectly
    I do not boast, perhaps: yourself are judge
    Who listened to the Legate's talk last week,
    And just as much they used to say in France.
    At any rate 'tis easy, all of it,
    No sketches first, no studies, that's long past--
    I do what many dream of all their lives
    --Dream? strive to do, and agonise to do,
    And fail in doing. I could count twenty such
    On twice your fingers, and not leave this town,
    Who strive--you don't know how the others strive
    To paint a little thing like that you smeared
    Carelessly passing with your robes afloat,--
    Yet do much less, so much less, Someone says,
    (I know his name, no matter) so much less!
    Well, less is more, Lucrezia! I am judged.
    There burns a truer light of God in them,
    In their vexed, beating, stuffed and stopped-up brain,
    Heart, or whate'er else, that goes on to prompt
    This low-pulsed forthright craftsman's hand of mine.
    Their works drop groundward, but themselves, I know,
    Reach many a time a heaven that's shut to me,
    Enter and take their place there sure enough,
    Though they come back and cannot tell the world.
    My works are nearer heaven, but I sit here.
                                      (_Andrea del Sarto._)

Social intercourse occupied a large portion of the day. Browning
identified himself with the daily life of Venice, and, besides this,
English and American acquaintances were frequently in Venice: the
poet, his reputation now firmly established and extending, was sought
after by innumerable admirers. He was a man of great social charm,--a
brilliant talker, full of amusing anecdotes,--his memory for
historical incident was only paralleled by his immense literary
knowledge, upon which he drew for apt illustration. Yet he was
naturally a reticent man, of painfully nervous excitability; "nervous
to such a degree," as he said of himself, "that I might fancy I could
not enter a drawing-room, did I not know from my experience that I
_could_ do it." This very nervousness, however, often induced an
almost abnormal vivacity of speech: and Browning was warmly welcomed
amongst the notable and even royal folk whose names were included in
Mrs. Bronson's circle; they recognised in him, as Frederick Tennyson
had done, "a man of infinite learning, jest, and _bonhomie_, and
moreover a sterling heart that reveals no hollowness." To women he was
specially attracted, and _vice-versâ_; "that golden-hearted Robert,"
as his wife had termed him, had an intimate understanding of the
woman's mind. But towards children, he was, so to speak, almost numb.
Devoted though he was to his only son, "the essential quality of early
childhood was not that which appealed to him:" and the fervour of
parental instinct finds practically no expression in his poems.

In the course of the day the poet would lose no opportunity of hearing
any important concert: an accomplished musician himself, his love for
the tone-art amounted to a passion: and in many of his greatest poems,
he had voiced the most secret meanings of music, and the yearning
aspirations of a composer. We "sit alone in the loft" with the
organist, Master Hughes of Saxe-Gotha, and his "huge house of the
sounds," to listen and wonder while his fugue "broadens and thickens,
greatens and deepens and lengthens," and the intricacy of constructive
technique forms, as someone has said, "an interposing web spun by the
brain between art and things divine." Or we stand with Abt Vogler in
his "palace of music" as it falls to pieces, and the magic of
inspiration over-rides the mastery of construction. The void of the
silence is filled with "the substance of things hoped for; the
evidence of things not seen," and faith is born of the composer's very
impotence to realize the heights of his own ambition--yet one more
rendering of that triumphant failure, of which Browning was the
prophet:

    All we have willed or hoped or dreamed of good shall exist;
        Not its semblance, but itself; no beauty, nor good, nor power
    Whose voice has gone forth, but each survives for the melodist
        When eternity affirms the conception of an hour.
    The high that proved too high, the heroic for earth too hard,
        The passion that left the ground to lose itself in the sky,
    Are music sent up to God by the lover and the bard;
        Enough that he heard it once: we shall hear it by-and-by.

    And what is our failure here but a triumph's evidence
        For the fulness of the days? Have we withered or agonized?
    Why else was the pause prolonged but that singing might issue
          thence?
        Why rushed the discords in but that harmony should be prized?
    Sorrow is hard to bear, and doubt is slow to clear,
        Each sufferer says his say, his scheme of the weal and woe:
    But God has a few of us whom he whispers in the ear;
        The rest may reason and welcome: 'tis we musicians know.
                                                         (_Abt Vogler._)

And, as a final contrast, drawn out of that shoreless sea of contrasts
which music can reveal, we have _A Toccata of Galuppi's_, suffused
with the melancholy of mundane pleasure, steeped in the ephemeral
voluptuousness of eighteenth-century Venice. In these lines, it has
been pointed out, "Browning's self-restraint is admirable.... The poet
will not say a word more than the musician has said in his Toccata."

    Did young people take their pleasure when the sea was warm in May?
    Balls and masks begun at midnight, burning ever to mid-day,
    When they made up fresh adventures for the morrow, do you say?

           *       *       *       *       *

    Well (and it was graceful of them) they'd break talk off and
      afford--
    --She to bite her mask's black velvet, he to finger on his sword,
    While you sat and played Toccatas, stately at the clavichord?


[Illustration: _Painting by W. Russell Flint._ A TOCCATA OF
GALUPPI'S.]


    Oh, Galuppi, Baldassaro, this is very sad to find!
    I can hardly misconceive you; it would prove me deaf and blind;
    But although I take your meaning, 'tis with such a heavy mind!
    Here you come with your old music, and here's all the good it
      brings.
    What, they lived thus at Venice, where the merchants were the kings,
    Where St. Mark's is, where the Doges used to wed the sea with rings?

           *       *       *       *       *

    Did young people take their pleasure when the sea was warm in May?
    Balls and masks begun at midnight, burning ever to mid-day,
    When they made up fresh adventures for the morrow, do you say?

           *       *       *       *       *

    Well (and it was graceful of them) they'd break talk off and
      afford--
    --She to bite her mask's black velvet, he to finger on his sword,
    While you sat and played Toccatas, stately at the clavichord?

    What? Those lesser thirds so plaintive, sixths diminished, sigh on
      sigh,
    Told them something? Those suspensions, those solutions--"Must we
      die?"
    Those commiserating sevenths--"Life might last! we can but try!"

    "Were you happy?"--"Yes."--"And are you still as happy?"--"Yes. And
      you?"
    --"Then, more kisses!"--"Did I stop them, when a million seemed so
      few?"
    Hark! the dominant's persistence, till it must be answered to!

    So an octave struck the answer. Oh, they praised you, I dare say!
    "Brave Galuppi! that was music! good alike at grave and gay!
    I can always leave off talking when I hear a master play!"

    Then they left you for your pleasure: till in due time, one by one,
    Some with lives that came to nothing, some with deeds as well
      undone,
    Death came tacitly and took them where they never see the sun.

           *       *       *       *       *

                                            (_A Toccata of Galuppi's._)

The afternoon wore by quickly, and it was soon time to dress for
dinner: for Browning was precise in adhering to the customs of
civilised life: and he liked to see his sister seated opposite him,
clad in beautiful gowns of sombre richness, and wearing quaint old
jewelry. Browning accepted his meals with frank pleasure; he was no
ascetic, and "his optimism and his belief in direct Providence led him
to make a direct virtue of happiness," and to welcome it in its
simplest form. Any guest who might be present was privileged to enjoy
that sparkling and many-faceted eloquence to which reference has been
made already. But the host was always careful to avoid deep or solemn
topics--doubtless because he felt them far too keenly, to use them as
mere texts for dinner-table discussion. "If such were broached in his
presence, he dismissed them with one strong convincing sentence, and
adroitly turned the current of conversation into a shallower channel."

Later on, he would probably visit the Goldoni Theatre, where he had a
large box: or, if remaining at home, he was often prevailed upon to
read aloud. His delivery was forcible and dramatic,--he would strongly
emphasise all the light and shade of a poem, and the touches of
character in the dialogue. Especially was this the case when reading
his own compositions. But often he would say with a smile, "No R. B.
to-night!--let us have some real poetry," and would take down a volume
of Shelley, Keats or Coleridge.

At last, another of the "divine sunsets" which Browning adored had
faded over the Lido; the "quiet-coloured end of evening" had darkened
into dusk and stars. Even that alert and indefatigable frame grew
weary with the day's long doings, and a natural desire for rest
descended upon "the brain which too much thought expands." The vision
of Guercino's picture, "fraught with a pathos so magnificent,"
returned upon him from that sultry day in which he had beheld the
"Guardian Angel" at Fano, "my angel with me, too," and he longed for
the touch of those divinely-healing hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Dear and great Angel, would'st thou only leave
      That child, when thou hast done with him, for me!
    Let me sit all the day here, that when eve
      Shall find performed thy special ministry
    And time come for departure, thou, suspending
    Thy flight, may'st see another child for tending,
      Another still, to quiet and retrieve.


[Illustration: _Painting by W. Russell Flint._ THE GUARDIAN ANGEL.]


    Dear and great Angel, wouldst thou only leave
      That child, when thou hast done with him, for me!
    Let me sit all the day here, that when eve
      Shall find performed thy special ministry
    And time come for departure, thou, suspending
    Thy flight, mayst see another child for tending,
      Another still, to quiet and retrieve.

    Then I shall feel thee step one step, no more,
      From where thou standest now, to where I gaze,
    --And suddenly my head is covered o'er
      With those wings, white above the child who prays
    Now on that tomb--and I shall feel thee guarding
    Me, out of all the world; for me, discarding
      Yon Heaven thy home, that waits and opes its door!

    I would not look up thither past thy head
      Because the door opes, like that child, I know,
    For I should have thy gracious face instead,

      Thou bird of God! And wilt thou bend me low
    Like him, and lay, like his, my hands together,
    And lift them up to pray, and gently tether
      Me, as thy lamb there, with thy garments spread?...

    How soon all worldly wrong would be repaired!
      I think how I should view the earth and skies
    And sea, when once again my brow was bared
      After thy healing, with such different eyes.
    O world, as God has made it! all is beauty:
    And knowing this, is love, and love is duty.
      What further may be sought for or declared?

Yet it was not to a celestial visitant that Browning's thoughts turned
most, now or at any other time. It was towards the one love of his
life,--towards that re-union, that restoration, that infrangible joy
of retrieval, which was the goal of his whole desire. And,
characteristically of the man who was "ever a fighter," he did not
expect to reach his haven by a calm and prosperous passage. It had to
be fought for--struggled for from strength to strength,--attained
through incessant and arduous combat. For those do not "mount, and
that hardly, to eternal life," who remain content upon terrestrial
planes;

    "Surely they see not God, I know,
    Nor all that chivalry of His,
    The soldier-saints, who, row on row,
    Burn upwards each to his point of bliss,
    Since, the end of life being manifest,
    He had cut his way through the world to this."

Therefore, as sleep, "Death's twin-brother," came slowly through the
darkness, the fighter faced his last hour in imagination, and made
haste to "greet the future with a cheer." For _Prospice_ is an "act of
the faith which comes through love.... No lonely adventure is here to
reward the victor o'er death: the transcendant joy is human love
recovered":

    Fear death?--to feel the fog in my throat,
            The mist in my face,
    When the snows begin, and the blasts denote
            I am nearing the place,
    The power of the night, the press of the storm,
            The post of the foe;
    Where he stands, the Arch Fear in a visible form,
            Yet the strong man must go:
    For the journey is done and the summit attained,
            And the barriers fall,
    Though a battle's to fight ere the guerdon be gained,
            The reward of it all.
    I was ever a fighter, so--one fight more,
            The best and the last!
    I would hate that death bandaged my eyes, and forbore,
            And bade me creep past.
    No! let me taste the whole of it, fare like my peers
            The heroes of old,
    Bear the brunt, in a minute pay glad life's arrears
            Of pain, darkness and cold.
    For sudden the worst turns the best to the brave,
            The black minute's at end,
    And the elements' rage, the fiend-voices that rave,
            Shall dwindle, shall blend,
    Shall change, shall become first a peace out of pain,
            Then a light, then thy breast,
    O thou soul of my soul! I shall clasp thee again,
            And with God be the rest!
            (_Prospice._)

_Printed by Percy Lund, Humphries & Co., Ltd., Bradford and London._





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Day with Browning, by 
Anonymous and Robert Browning

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY WITH BROWNING ***

***** This file should be named 40440-8.txt or 40440-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/4/4/40440/

Produced by Delphine Lettau, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
