The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pied Piper of Hamelin and Other Poems, by 
Robert Browning

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Pied Piper of Hamelin and Other Poems
       Every Boy's Library

Author: Robert Browning

Release Date: May 30, 2013 [EBook #42850]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Paul Clark and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


  If this is borrowed by a friend
  Right welcome shall he be
  To read, to study, _not_ to _lend_
  But to return to me.
  Not that imparted knowledge doth
  Diminish learning's store
  But books I find if often lent
  Return to me no more.




Every Boy's Library

For Little Boys

NEW EDITION, 1910


=1 The Man Without a Country= By Rev. E. E. Hale

=2 The Bicycle Highwaymen= By Frank M. Bicknell

=3 The Railroad Cut= By W. O. Stoddard

=4 J. Cole= By Emma Gellibrand

=5 Laddie= By Evelyn Whitaker

=6 Miss Toosey= By Evelyn Whitaker

=7 Elder Leland's Ghost= By Hezekiah Butterworth

=9 Wonder Book Stories= By Nathaniel Hawthorne

=10 The Prince of the Pin Elves= By Charles Lee Sleight

=11 The Little Lame Prince= By Miss Mulock

=12 One Thousand Men for a Christmas Present= By Mary B. Sheldon

=13 The Little Earl= By Ouida

=14 The Double Prince= By Frank M. Bicknell

=15 The Young Archer= By Charles E. Brimblecom

=16 Little Peterkin Vandike= By Charles Stuart Pratt

=17 Christmas Carol= By Charles Dickens

=18 A Great Emergency= By Juliana Horatia Ewing

=19 The Rose and the Ring= By William M. Thackeray

=20 Lazy Lawrence and other Stories= By Maria Edgeworth

=21 Forgive and Forget and Other Stories= By Maria Edgeworth

=22 The False Key and other Stories= By Maria Edgeworth

=23 A Boy's Battle= By Will Allen Dromgoole

=24 The Gold Bug= By Edgar Allan Poe

=25 The Pineboro Quartette= By Willis Boyd Allen

=26 His Majesty the King and Wee Willie Winkie= By Rudyard Kipling

=27 The Old Monday Farm= By Louise R. Baker

=28 Daddy Darwin's Dovecote= By Juliana H. Ewing

=29 Little Dick's Christmas= By Etheldred B. Barry

=30 What Paul Did= By Etheldred B. Barry

=31 Harum Scarum Joe= By Will Allen Dromgoole

=32 The Drums of the Fore and Aft= By Rudyard Kipling

=33 The Child of Urbino and Moufflou= By Ouida

=34 Hero-Chums= By Will Allen Dromgoole

=35 Little Tong's Mission= By Etheldred B. Barry


                         H. M. CALDWELL COMPANY
                               Publishers
                          NEW YORK AND BOSTON




[Illustration: THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN]




                          EVERY BOY'S LIBRARY

                                THE PIED
                                PIPER of
                                HAMELIN

                            and Other Poems

                                   By

                            ROBERT BROWNING

                             [Illustration]

                              ILLUSTRATED

                           H. M. CALDWELL CO.
                               PUBLISHERS
                           NEW YORK & BOSTON




                           _Copyright, 1899_
                        BY DANA ESTES & COMPANY




CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE

    THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN                                         11

    HERVÉ RIEL                                                        24

    CAVALIER TUNES                                                    31

    "HOW THEY BROUGHT THE GOOD NEWS FROM GHENT TO AIX"                34

    THROUGH THE METIDJA TO ABD-EL-KADR                                37

    INCIDENT OF THE FRENCH CAMP                                       39

    CLIVE                                                             41

    MULÉYKEH                                                          59

    TRAY                                                              68

    A TALE                                                            70

    GOLD HAIR                                                         75

    DONALD                                                            82

    THE GLOVE                                                         90




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                    PAGE

 THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN                                _Frontispiece_

 "'LEAVE TO GO AND SEE MY WIFE, WHOM I CALL THE BELLE AURORE'"        30

 "I GALLOPED, DIRCK GALLOPED, WE GALLOPED ALL THREE"                  34

 "A RIDER BOUND ON BOUND FULL GALLOPING, NOR BRIDLE DREW UNTIL
     HE REACHED THE MOUND"                                            39

 "HAIR, SUCH A WONDER OF FLIX AND FLOSS"                              75

 "AND FULL IN THE FACE OF ITS OWNER FLUNG THE GLOVE"                  95




THE BOYS' BROWNING.




THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN.

A CHILD'S STORY.


  I.

    Hamelin Town's in Brunswick,
  By famous Hanover city;
    The river Weser, deep and wide,
    Washes its wall on the southern side;
    A pleasanter spot you never spied;
  But, when begins my ditty,
    Almost five hundred years ago,
    To see the townsfolk suffer so
      From vermin, was a pity.


  II.

    Rats!
  They fought the dogs and killed the cats,
    And bit the babies in the cradles,
  And ate the cheeses out of the vats,
    And licked the soup from the cooks' own ladles,
  Split open the kegs of salted sprats,
  Made nests inside men's Sunday hats,
  And even spoiled the women's chats
    By drowning their speaking
    With shrieking and squeaking
  In fifty different sharps and flats.


  III.

  At last the people in a body
    To the Town Hall came flocking:
  "'Tis clear," cried they, "our Mayor's a noddy;
    And as for our Corporation--shocking
  To think we buy gowns lined with ermine
  For dolts that can't or won't determine
  What's best to rid us of our vermin!
  You hope, because you're old and obese,
  To find in the furry civic robe ease?
  Rouse up, sirs! Give your brains a racking
  To find the remedy we're lacking,
  Or, sure as fate, we'll send you packing!"
  At this the Mayor and Corporation
  Quaked with a mighty consternation.


  IV.

  An hour they sat in council;
    At length the Mayor broke silence:
  "For a guilder I'd my ermine gown sell,
    I wish I were a mile hence!
  It's easy to bid one rack one's brain--
  I'm sure my poor head aches again,
  I've scratched it so, and all in vain.
  Oh, for a trap, a trap, a trap!"
  Just as he said this, what should hap
  At the chamber-door but a gentle tap?
  "Bless us," cried the Mayor, "what's that?"
  (With the Corporation as he sat,
  Looking little though wondrous fat;
  Nor brighter was his eye, nor moister
  Than a too-long-opened oyster,
  Save when at noon his paunch grew mutinous
  For a plate of turtle green and glutinous)
  "Only a scraping of shoes on the mat?
  Anything like the sound of a rat
  Makes my heart go pit-a-pat!"


  V.

  "Come in!"--the Mayor cried, looking bigger:
  And in did come the strangest figure!
  His queer long coat from heel to head
  Was half of yellow and half of red,
  And he himself was tall and thin,
  With sharp blue eyes, each like a pin,
  And light loose hair, yet swarthy skin,
  No tuft on cheek nor beard on chin,
  But lips where smiles went out and in;
  There was no guessing his kith and kin:
  And nobody could enough admire
  The tall man and his quaint attire.
  Quoth one: "It's as my great-grandsire,
  Starting up at the Trump of Doom's tone,
  Had walked this way from his painted tombstone!"


  VI.

  He advanced to the council-table:
  And, "Please your honours," said he, "I'm able,
  By means of a secret charm, to draw
  All creatures living beneath the sun,
  That creep or swim or fly or run,
  After me so as you never saw!
  And I chiefly use my charm
  On creatures that do people harm,
  The mole and toad and newt and viper;
  And people call me the Pied Piper."
  (And here they noticed round his neck
  A scarf of red and yellow stripe,
  To match with his coat of the self-same cheque;
  And at the scarf's end hung a pipe;
  And his fingers, they noticed, were ever straying
  As if impatient to be playing
  Upon this pipe, as low it dangled
  Over his vesture so old-fangled.)
  "Yet," said he, "poor piper as I am,
  In Tartary I freed the Cham,
  Last June, from his huge swarms of gnats;
  I eased in Asia the Nizam
  Of a monstrous brood of vampire-bats:
  And as for what your brain bewilders,
  If I can rid your town of rats
  Will you give me a thousand guilders?"
  "One? fifty thousand!"--was the exclamation
  Of the astonished Mayor and Corporation.


  VII.

  Into the street the Piper stept,
    Smiling first a little smile,
  As if he knew what magic slept
    In his quiet pipe the while;
  Then, like a musical adept,
  To blow the pipe his lips he wrinkled,
  And green and blue his sharp eyes twinkled,
  Like a candle-flame where salt is sprinkled;
  And ere three shrill notes the pipe uttered,
  You heard as if an army muttered;
  And the muttering grew to a grumbling;
  And the grumbling grew to a mighty rumbling;
  And out of the houses the rats came tumbling.
  Great rats, small rats, lean rats, brawny rats
  Brown rats, black rats, gray rats, tawny rats
  Grave old plodders, gay young friskers,
    Fathers, mothers, uncles, cousins,
  Cocking tails and pricking whiskers,
    Families by tens and dozens,
  Brothers, sisters, husbands, wives--
  Followed the Piper for their lives.
  From street to street he piped advancing,
  And step for step they followed dancing,
  Until they came to the river Weser,
  Wherein all plunged and perished!
  --Save one who, stout as Julius Cæsar,
  Swam across and lived to carry
  (As he, the manuscript he cherished)
  To Rat-land home his commentary:
  Which was, "At the first shrill notes of the pipe,
  I heard a sound as of scraping tripe,
  And putting apples, wondrous ripe,
  Into a cider-press's gripe:
  And a moving away of pickle-tub-boards,
  And a leaving ajar of conserve-cupboards,
  And a drawing the corks of train-oil-flasks,
  And a breaking the hoops of butter-casks:
  And it seemed as if a voice
  (Sweeter far than by harp or by psaltery
  Is breathed) called out, 'Oh, rats, rejoice!
  The world is grown to one vast drysaltery!
  So munch on, crunch on, take your nuncheon,
  Breakfast, supper, dinner, luncheon!'
  And just as a bulky sugar-puncheon,
  All ready staved, like a great sun shone
  Glorious scarce an inch before me,
  Just as methought it said, 'Come, bore me!'
  --I found the Weser rolling o'er me."


  VIII.

  You should have heard the Hamelin people
  Ringing the bells till they rocked the steeple.
  "Go," cried the Mayor, "and get long poles,
  Poke out the nests and block up the holes!
  Consult with carpenters and builders,
  And leave in our town not even a trace
  Of the rats!"--when suddenly, up the face
  Of the Piper perked in the market-place,
  With a, "First, if you please, my thousand guilders!"


  IX.

  A thousand guilders! The Mayor looked blue;
  So did the Corporation, too.
  For council dinners made rare havoc
  With Claret, Moselle, Vin-de-Grave, Hock;
  And half the money would replenish
  Their cellar's biggest butt with Rhenish.
  To pay this sum to a wandering fellow
  With a gypsy coat of red and yellow!
  "Beside," quoth the Mayor with a knowing wink,
  "Our business was done at the river's brink;
  We saw with our eyes the vermin sink,
  And what's dead can't come to life, I think.
  So, friend, we're not the folks to shrink
  From the duty of giving you something for drink,
  And a matter of money to put in your poke;
  But as for the guilders, what we spoke
  Of them, as you very well know, was in joke.
  Beside, our losses have made us thrifty.
  A thousand guilders! Come, take fifty!"


  X.

  The Piper's face fell, and he cried,
  "No trifling! I can't wait, beside!
  I've promised to visit by dinner-time
  Bagdat, and accept the prime
  Of the Head-Cook's pottage, all he's rich in,
  For having left, in the Caliph's kitchen,
  Of a nest of scorpions no survivor:
  With him I proved no bargain-driver,
  With you, don't think I'll bate a stiver!
  And folks who put me in a passion
  May find me pipe after another fashion."


  XI.

  "How?" cried the Mayor, "d'ye think I brook
  Being worse treated than a Cook?
  Insulted by a lazy ribald
  With idle pipe and vesture piebald?
  You threaten us, fellow? Do your worst,
  Blow your pipe there till you burst!"


  XII.

  Once more he stept into the street,
    And to his lips again
  Laid his long pipe of smooth straight cane;
    And ere he blew three notes (such sweet
  Soft notes as yet musician's cunning
    Never gave the enraptured air)
  There was a rustling that seemed like a bustling
  Of merry crowds justling at pitching and hustling;
  Small feet were pattering, wooden shoes clattering,
  Little hands clapping and little tongues chattering,
  And, like fowls in a farmyard when barley is scattering,
  Out came the children running.
  All the little boys and girls,
  With rosy cheeks and flaxen curls,
  And sparkling eyes and teeth like pearls,
  Tripping and skipping, ran merrily after
  The wonderful music with shouting and laughter.


  XIII.

  The Mayor was dumb, and the Council stood
  As if they were changed into blocks of wood,
  Unable to move a step, or cry
  To the children merrily skipping by,
  --Could only follow with the eye
  That joyous crowd at the Piper's back.
  But how the Mayor was on the rack,
  And the wretched Council's bosoms beat,
  As the Piper turned from the High Street
  To where the Weser rolled its waters
  Right in the way of their sons and daughters!
  However, he turned from South to West,
  And to Koppelberg Hill his steps addressed,
  And after him the children pressed;
  Great was the joy in every breast.
  "He never can cross that mighty top!
  He's forced to let the piping drop,
  And we shall see our children stop!"
  When, lo, as they reached the mountainside,
  A wondrous portal opened wide,
  As if a cavern was suddenly hollowed;
  And the Piper advanced and the children followed,
  And when all were in to the very last,
  The door in the mountainside shut fast.
  Did I say, all? No! One was lame,
  And could not dance the whole of the way;
  And in after years, if you would blame
  His sadness, he was used to say,--
  "It's dull in our town since my playmates left!
  I can't forget that I'm bereft
  Of all the pleasant sights they see,
  Which the Piper also promised me.
  For he led us, he said, to a joyous land,
  Joining the town and just at hand,
  Where waters gushed and fruit-trees grew
  And flowers put forth a fairer hue,
  And everything was strange and new;
  The sparrows were brighter than peacocks here,
  And their dogs outran our fallow deer,
  And honey-bees had lost their stings,
  And horses were born with eagles' wings:
  And just as I became assured
  My lame foot would be speedily cured,
  The music stopped and I stood still,
  And found myself outside the hill,
  Left alone against my will,
  To go now limping as before,
  And never hear of that country more!"


  XIV.

  Alas, alas for Hamelin!
    There came into many a burgher's pate
    A text which says that heaven's gate
    Opes to the rich at as easy rate
  As the needle's eye takes a camel in!
  The Mayor sent East, West, North, and South,
  To offer the Piper, by word of mouth,
    Wherever it was men's lot to find him,
  Silver and gold to his heart's content,
  If he'd only return the way he went,
    And bring the children behind him.
  But when they saw 'twas a lost endeavour,
  And Piper and dancers were gone for ever,
  They made a decree that lawyers never
    Should think their records dated duly
  If, after the day of the month and year,
  These words did not as well appear,
  "And so long after what happened here
    On the Twenty-second of July,
  Thirteen hundred and seventy-six:"
  And the better in memory to fix
  The place of the children's last retreat,
  They called it, the Pied Piper's Street--
  Where any one playing on pipe or tabour
  Was sure for the future to lose his labour.
  Nor suffered they hostelry or tavern
    To shock with mirth a street so solemn;
  But opposite the place of the cavern
    They wrote the story on a column,
  And on the great church-window painted
  The same, to make the world acquainted
  How their children were stolen away,
  And there it stands to this very day.
  And I must not omit to say
  That in Transylvania there's a tribe
  Of alien people who ascribe
  The outlandish ways and dress
  On which their neighbours lay such stress,
  To their fathers and mothers having risen
  Out of some subterraneous prison
  Into which they were trepanned
  Long time ago in a mighty band
  Out of Hamelin town in Brunswick land,
  But how or why, they don't understand.


  XV.

  So, Willy, let me and you be wipers
  Of scores out with all men--especially pipers!
  And, whether they pipe us free fróm rats or fróm mice,
  If we've promised them aught, let us keep our promise!




HERVÉ RIEL.


  I.

  On the sea and at the Hogue, sixteen hundred ninety-two,
    Did the English fight the French,--woe to France!
  And, the thirty-first of May, helter-skelter through the blue,
  Like a crowd of frightened porpoises a shoal of sharks pursue,
    Came crowding ship on ship to Saint Malo on the Rance,
  With the English fleet in view.


  II.

  'Twas the squadron that escaped, with the victor in full chase;
    First and foremost of the drove, in his great ship, Damfreville;
        Close on him fled, great and small,
        Twenty-two good ships in all;
  And they signalled to the place
  "Help the winners of a race!
    Get us guidance, give us harbour, take us quick--or, quicker still,
    Here's the English can and will!"


  III.

  Then the pilots of the place put out brisk and leapt on board;
    "Why, what hope or chance have ships like these to pass?"
      laughed they:
  "Rocks to starboard, rocks to port, all the passage scarred
      and scored,
  Shall the _Formidable_ here with her twelve and eighty guns
    Think to make the river-mouth by the single narrow way,
  Trust to enter where 'tis ticklish for a craft of twenty tons,
        And with flow at full beside?
        Now, 'tis slackest ebb of tide.
      Reach the mooring? Rather say,
    While rock stands or water runs,
      Not a ship will leave the bay!"


  IV.

  Then was called a council straight.
  Brief and bitter the debate:
  "Here's the English at our heels; would you have them take in tow
  All that's left us of the fleet, linked together stern and bow,
  For a prize to Plymouth Sound?
  Better run the ships aground!"
    (Ended Damfreville his speech.)
  "Not a minute more to wait!
    Let the Captains all and each
    Shove ashore, then blow up, burn the vessels on the beach!
  France must undergo her fate.


  V.

  "Give the word!" But no such word
  Was ever spoke or heard;
  For up stood, for out stepped, for in struck amid all these
  --A Captain? A Lieutenant? A Mate--first, second, third?
    No such man of mark, and meet
    With his betters to compete!
    But a simple Breton sailor pressed by Tourville for the fleet,
  A poor coasting-pilot he, Hervé Riel the Croisickese.


  VI.

  And "What mockery or malice have we here?" cries Hervé Riel:
    "Are you mad, you Malouins? Are you cowards, fools, or rogues?
  Talk to me of rocks and shoals, me who took the soundings, tell
  On my fingers every bank, every shallow, every swell
    'Twixt the offing here and Grève where the river disembogues?
  Are you bought by English gold? Is it love the lying's for?
        Morn and eve, night and day,
        Have I piloted your bay,
  Entered free and anchored fast at the foot of Solidor.
    Burn the fleet and ruin France? That were worse than fifty Hogues!
    Sirs, they know I speak the truth! Sirs, believe me there's a way!
  Only let me lead the line,
    Have the biggest ship to steer,
    Get this _Formidable_ clear,
  Make the others follow mine,
  And I lead them, most and least, by a passage I know well,
    Right to Solidor past Grève,
      And there lay them safe and sound;
      And if one ship misbehave,
      --Keel so much as grate the ground,
  Why, I've nothing but my life,--here's my head!" cries Hervé Riel.


  VII.

  Not a minute more to wait.
  "Steer us in, then, small and great!
    Take the helm, lead the line, save the squadron!" cried its chief.
  Captains, give the sailor place!
    He is Admiral, in brief.
  Still the north wind, by God's grace!
  See the noble fellow's face
  As the big ship, with a bound,
  Clears the entry like a hound,
  Keeps the passage as its inch of way were the wide sea's profound!
    See, safe through shoal and rock,
    How they follow in a flock,
  Not a ship that misbehaves, not a keel that grates the ground,
    Not a spar that comes to grief!
  The peril, see, is past,
  All are harboured to the last,
  And just as Hervé Riel hollas "Anchor!"--sure as fate,
  Up the English come--too late!


  VIII.

  So, the storm subsides to calm:
    They see the green trees wave
    On the heights o'erlooking Grève.
  Hearts that bled are stanched with balm.
  "Just our rapture to enhance,
    Let the English rake the bay,
  Gnash their teeth and glare askance
    As they cannonade away!
  'Neath rampired Solidor pleasant riding on the Rance!"
  How hope succeeds despair on each Captain's countenance!
  Out burst all with one accord,
    "This is Paradise for Hell!
    Let France, let France's King
    Thank the man that did the thing!"
  What a shout, and all one word,
    "Hervé Riel!"
  As he stepped in front once more,
    Not a symptom of surprise
    In the frank blue Breton eyes,
  Just the same man as before.


  IX.

  Then said Damfreville, "My friend,
  I must speak out at the end,
    Though I find the speaking hard.
  Praise is deeper than the lips:
  You have saved the King his ships,
    You must name your own reward.
  'Faith, our sun was near eclipse!
  Demand whate'er you will,
  France remains your debtor still.
  Ask to heart's content and have! or my name's not Damfreville."


  X.

  Then a beam of fun outbroke
  On the bearded mouth that spoke,
  As the honest heart laughed through
  Those frank eyes of Breton blue:
  "Since I needs must say my say,
    Since on board the duty's done,
    And from Malo Roads to Croisic Point, what is it but a run?--
  Since 'tis ask and have, I may--
    Since the others go ashore--
  Come! A good whole holiday!
    Leave to go and see my wife, whom I call the Belle Aurore!"
    That he asked and that he got,--nothing more.


  XI.

  Name and deed alike are lost:
  Not a pillar nor a post
    In his Croisic keeps alive the feat as it befell;
  Not a head in white and black
  On a single fishing-smack,
  In memory of the man but for whom had gone to wrack
    All that France saved from the fight whence England bore the bell.
  Go to Paris: rank on rank
    Search the heroes flung pell-mell
  On the Louvre, face and flank!
    You shall look long enough ere you come to Hervé Riel.
  So, for better and for worse,
  Hervé Riel, accept my verse!
  In my verse, Hervé Riel, do thou once more
  Save the squadron, honour France, love thy wife the Belle Aurore!

[Illustration: "'LEAVE TO GO AND SEE MY WIFE, WHOM I CALL THE BELLE
AURORE.'"]




CAVALIER TUNES.


I. MARCHING ALONG.

  Kentish Sir Byng stood for his King,
  Bidding the crop-headed Parliament swing:
  And, pressing a troop unable to stoop
  And see the rogues flourish and honest folk droop,
  Marched them along, fifty-score strong,
  Great-hearted gentlemen, singing this song.

  God for King Charles! Pym and such carles
  To the Devil that prompts 'em their treasonous parles!
  Cavaliers, up! Lips from the cup,
  Hands from the pasty, nor bite take nor sup
  Till you're--

  CHORUS.--Marching along, fifty-score strong,
           Great-hearted gentlemen, singing this song.

  Hampden to hell, and his obsequies' knell.
  Serve Hazelrig, Fiennes, and young Harry as well!
  England, good cheer! Rupert is near!
  Kentish and loyalists, keep we not here,

  CHO.--Marching along, fifty-score strong,
        Great-hearted gentlemen, singing this song?

  Then, God for King Charles! Pym and his snarls
  To the Devil that pricks on such pestilent carles!
  Hold by the right, you double your might;
  So, onward to Nottingham, fresh for the fight,

  CHO.--March we along, fifty-score strong,
        Great-hearted gentlemen, singing this song!


II. GIVE A ROUSE.

  King Charles, and who'll do him right now?
  King Charles, and who's ripe for fight now?
  Give a rouse: here's, in hell's despite now,
  King Charles!

  Who gave me the goods that went since?
  Who raised me the house that sank once?
  Who helped me to gold I spent since?
  Who found me in wine you drank once?

  CHO.--King Charles, and who'll do him right now?
        King Charles, and who's ripe for fight now?
        Give a rouse: here's, in hell's despite now,
        King Charles!

  To whom used my boy George quaff else,
  By the old fool's side that begot him?
  For whom did he cheer and laugh else,
  While Noll's damned troopers shot him?

  CHO.--King Charles, and who'll do him right now?
        King Charles, and who's ripe for fight now?
        Give a rouse: here's, in hell's despite now,
        King Charles!


III. BOOT AND SADDLE.

  Boot, saddle, to horse, and away!
  Rescue my castle before the hot day
  Brightens to blue from its silvery gray.

  CHO.--"Boot, saddle, to horse, and away!"

  Ride past the suburbs, asleep as you'd say;
  Many's the friend there, will listen and pray
  "God's luck to gallants that strike up the lay--

  CHO.--"Boot, saddle, to horse, and away!"

  Forty miles off, like a roebuck at bay,
  Flouts Castle Brancepeth the Roundheads' array:
  Who laughs, "Good fellows ere this, by my fay,

  CHO.--"Boot, saddle, to horse, and away!"

  Who? My wife Gertrude; that, honest and gay,
  Laughs when you talk of surrendering, "Nay!
  I've better counsellors; what counsel they?

  CHO.--"Boot, saddle, to horse and away!"

[Illustration: "I GALLOPED, DIRCK GALLOPED, WE GALLOPED ALL THREE."]




"HOW THEY BROUGHT THE GOOD NEWS FROM GHENT TO AIX."


  I sprang to the stirrup, and Joris, and he;
  I galloped, Dirck galloped, we galloped all three;
  "Good speed!" cried the watch, as the gate-bolts undrew;
  "Speed!" echoed the wall to us galloping through;
  Behind shut the postern, the lights sank to rest,
  And into the midnight we galloped abreast.

  Not a word to each other; we kept the great pace
  Neck by neck, stride by stride, never changing our place;
  I turned in my saddle and made its girths tight,
  Then shortened each stirrup, and set the pique right,
  Rebuckled the cheek-strap, chained slacker the bit,
  Nor galloped less steadily Roland a whit.

  'Twas moonset at starting; but while we drew near
  Lokeren, the cocks crew and twilight dawned clear:
  At Boom, a great yellow star came out to see;
  At Düffeld, 'twas morning as plain as could be;
  And from Mecheln church-steeple we heard the half chime,
  So Joris broke silence with, "Yet there is time!"

  At Aershot, up leaped of a sudden the sun,
  And against him the cattle stood black every one,
  To stare through the mist at us galloping past,
  And I saw my stout galloper Roland at last,
  With resolute shoulders, each butting away
  The haze, as some bluff river headland its spray:

  And his low head and crest, just one sharp ear bent back
  For my voice, and the other pricked out on his track;
  And one eye's black intelligence,--ever that glance
  O'er its white edge at me, his own master, askance!
  And the thick heavy spume-flakes which aye and anon
  His fierce lips shook upwards in galloping on.

  By Hasselt, Dirck groaned; and cried Joris, "Stay spur!
  Your Roos galloped bravely, the fault's not in her,
  We'll remember at Aix"--for one heard the quick wheeze
  Of her chest, saw the stretched neck and staggering knees,
  And sunk tail, and horrible heave of the flank,
  As down on her haunches she shuddered and sank.
  So, we were left galloping, Joris and I,
  Past Looz and past Tongres, no cloud in the sky;
  The broad sun above laughed a pitiless laugh,
  'Neath our feet broke the brittle bright stubble like chaff;
  Till over by Dalhem a dome-spire sprang white,
  And "Gallop," gasped Joris, "for Aix is in sight!"

  "How they'll greet us!" and all in a moment his roan
  Rolled neck and croup over, lay dead as a stone;
  And there was my Roland to hear the whole weight
  Of the news which alone could save Aix from her fate,
  With his nostrils like pits full of blood to the brim,
  And with circles of red for his eye-sockets' rim.

  Then I cast loose my buffcoat, each holster let fall,
  Shook off both my jack-boots, let go belt and all,
  Stood up in the stirrup, leaned, patted his ear,
  Called my Roland his pet-name, my horse without peer;
  Clapped my hands, laughed and sang, any noise, bad or good,
  Till at length into Aix Roland galloped and stood.

  And all I remember is--friends flocking round
  As I sat with his head, 'twixt my knees on the ground;
  And no voice but was praising this Roland of mine,
  As I poured down his throat our last measure of wine,
  Which (the burgesses voted by common consent)
  Was no more than his due who brought good news from Ghent.




THROUGH THE METIDJA TO ABD-EL-KADR.


  As I ride, as I ride,
  With a full heart for my guide,
  So its tide rocks my side,
  As I ride, as I ride,
  That, as I were double-eyed,
  He, in whom our Tribes confide,
  Is descried, ways untried,
  As I ride, as I ride.

  As I ride, as I ride
  To our Chief and his Allied,
  Who dares chide my heart's pride
  As I ride, as I ride?
  Or are witnesses denied--
  Through the desert waste and wide
  Do I glide unespied
  As I ride, as I ride?

  As I ride, as I ride,
  When an inner voice has cried,
  The sands slide, nor abide
  (As I ride, as I ride)
  O'er each visioned homicide
  That came vaunting (has he lied?)
  To reside--where he died,
  As I ride, as I ride.

  As I ride, as I ride,
  Ne'er has spur my swift horse plied,
  Yet his hide, streaked and pied,
  As I ride, as I ride,
  Shows where sweat has sprung and dried,
  --Zebra-footed, ostrich-thighed--
  How has vied stride with stride
  As I ride, as I ride!

  As I ride, as I ride,
  Could I loose what Fate has tied,
  Ere I pried, she should hide
  (As I ride, as I ride)
  All that's meant me--satisfied
  When the Prophet and the Bride
  Stop veins I'd have subside
  As I ride, as I ride!

[Illustration: "A RIDER BOUND ON BOUND FULL GALLOPING, NOR BRIDLE DREW
UNTIL HE REACHED THE MOUND."]




INCIDENT OF THE FRENCH CAMP.


  You know, we French stormed Ratisbon:
    A mile or so away,
  On a little mound, Napoleon
    Stood on our storming-day;
  With neck out-thrust, you fancy how,
    Legs wide, arms locked behind,
  As if to balance the prone brow,
    Oppressive with its mind.

  Just as perhaps he mused "My plans
    That soar, to earth may fall,
  Let once my army-leader, Lannes,
    Waver at yonder wall,--"
  Out 'twixt the battery-smokes there flew
    A rider, bound on bound
  Full-galloping; nor bridle drew
    Until he reached the mound.

  Then off there flung in smiling joy,
    And held himself erect
  By just his horse's mane, a boy:
    You hardly could suspect--
  (So tight he kept his lips compressed,
    Scarce any blood came through)
  You looked twice ere you saw his breast
    Was all but shot in two.

  "Well," cried he, "Emperor, by God's grace
    We've got you Ratisbon!
  The Marshal's in the market-place,
    And you'll be there anon
  To see your flag-bird flap his vans
    Where I, to heart's desire,
  Perched him!" The chief's eye flashed; his plans
    Soared up again like fire.

  The chief's eye flashed; but presently
    Softened itself, as sheathes
  A film the mother-eagle's eye
    When her bruised eaglet breathes;
  "You're wounded!" "Nay," the soldier's pride
    Touched to the quick, he said:
  "I'm killed, Sire!" and his chief beside,
    Smiling the boy fell dead.




CLIVE.


  I and Clive were friends--and why not? Friends! I think you laugh,
      my lad.
  Clive it was gave England India, while your father gives--egad,
  England nothing but the graceless boy who lures him on to speak--
  "Well, Sir, you and Clive were comrades--" with a tongue thrust in
      your cheek!
  Very true: in my eyes, your eyes, all the world's eyes, Clive was man,
  I was, am, and ever shall be--mouse, nay, mouse of all its clan
  Sorriest sample, if you take the kitchen's estimate for fame;
  While the man Clive--he fought Plassy, spoiled the clever foreign
      game,
  Conquered and annexed and Englished!

                      Never mind! As o'er my punch
  (You away) I sit of evenings,--silence, save for biscuit crunch,
  Black, unbroken,--thought grows busy, thrids each pathway of old
      years,
  Notes this forthright, that meander, till the long past life appears
  Like an outspread map of country plodded through, each mile and rood,
  Once, and well remembered still,--I'm startled in my solitude
  Ever and anon by--what's the sudden mocking light that breaks
  On me as I slap the table till no rummer-glass but shakes
  While I ask--aloud, I do believe, God help me!--"Was it thus?
  Can it be that so I faltered, stopped when just one step for us--"
  (Us,--you were not born, I grant, but surely some day born would be)
  "--One bold step had gained a province" (figurative talk, you see)
  "Got no end of wealth and honour,--yet I stood stock-still no less?"
  --"For I was not Clive," you comment: but it needs no Clive to guess
  Wealth were handy, honour ticklish, did no writing on the wall
  Warn me "Trespasser, 'ware man-traps!" Him who braves that
      notice--call
  Hero! None of such heroics suit myself who read plain words,
  Doff my hat, and leap no barrier. Scripture says, the land's the
      Lord's:
  Louts then--what avail the thousand, noisy in a smock-frocked ring,
  All-agog to have me trespass, clear the fence, be Clive their king?
  Higher warrant must you show me ere I set one foot before
  T'other in that dark direction, though I stand for evermore
  Poor as Job and meek as Moses. Evermore? No! By and by
  Job grows rich and Moses valiant, Clive turns out less wise than I.
  Don't object "Why call him friend, then?" Power is power, my boy,
      and still
  Marks a man,--God's gift magnific, exercised for good or ill.
  You've your boot now on my hearth-rug, tread what was a tiger's skin;
  Rarely such a royal monster as I lodged the bullet in!
  True, he murdered half a village, so his own death came to pass;
  Still, for size and beauty, cunning, courage--ah, the brute he was!
  Why, that Clive,--that youth, that greenhorn, that quill-driving
      clerk, in fine,--
  He sustained a siege in Arcot ... But the world knows! Pass the wine.

  Where did I break off at? How bring Clive in? Oh, you mentioned
      "fear!"
  Just so: and, said I, that minds me of a story you shall hear.

  We were friends then, Clive and I: so, when the clouds, about the orb
  Late supreme, encroaching slowly, surely threaten to absorb
  Ray by ray its noontide brilliance,--friendship might, with
      steadier eye
  Drawing near, hear what had burned else, now no blaze--all majesty.
  Too much bee's-wing floats my figure? Well, suppose a castle's new:
  None presume to climb its ramparts, none find foothold sure for shoe
  'Twixt those squares and squares of granite plating the impervious
      pile
  As his scale-mail's warty iron cuirasses a crocodile.
  Reels that castle thunder-smitten, storm-dismantled? From without
  Scrambling up by crack and crevice, every cockney prates about
  Towers--the heap he kicks now! Turrets--just the measure of his cane!
  Will that do? Observe moreover--(same similitude again)--
  Such a castle seldom crumbles by sheer stress of cannonade:
  'Tis when foes are foiled, and fighting's finished that vile rains
      invade,
  Grass o'ergrows, o'ergrows till night-birds congregating find no holes
  Fit to build like the topmost sockets made for banner-poles.
  So Clive crumbled slow in London, crashed at last.

                              A week before,
  Dining with him,--after trying churchyard chat of days of yore,--
  Both of us stopped, tired as tombstones, head-piece, foot-piece,
      when they lean
  Each to other, drowsed in fog-smoke, o'er a coffined Past between.
  As I saw his head sink heavy, guessed the soul's extinguishment
  By the glazing eyeball, noticed how the furtive fingers went
  Where a drug-box skulked behind the honest liquor,--"One more throw
  Try for Clive!" thought I: "Let's venture some good rattling
      question!" So--
  "Come Clive, tell us"--out I blurted--"what to tell in turn,
      years hence,
  When my boy--suppose I have one--asks me on what evidence
  I maintain my friend of Plassy proved a warrior every whit
  Worth your Alexanders, Cæsars, Marlboroughs, and--what said Pitt?--
  Frederick the Fierce himself! Clive told me once"--I want to say--
  "Which feat out of all those famous doings bore the bell away
  --In his own calm estimation, mark you, not the mob's rough guess--
  Which stood foremost as evincing what Clive called courageousness!
  Come! What moment of the minute, what speck-centre in the wide
  Circle of the action saw your mortal fairly deified?
  (Let alone that filthy sleep-stuff, swallow bold this wholesome Port!)
  If a friend has leave to question,--when were you most brave,
      in short?"

  Up he arched his brows o' the instant--formidably Clive again.
  "When was I most brave? I'd answer, were the instance half as plain
  As another instance that's a brain-lodged crystal--curse it!--here
  Freezing when my memory touches--ugh!--the time I felt most fear.
  Ugh! I cannot say for certain if I showed fear--anyhow,
  Fear I felt, and, very likely, shuddered, since I shiver now."

  "Fear!" smiled I. "Well, that's the rarer: that's a specimen to seek,
  Ticket up in one's museum, _Mind-Freaks_, _Lord Clive's Fear_,
      _Unique_!"

  Down his brows dropped. On the table painfully he pored as though
  Tracing, in the stains and streaks there, thoughts encrusted long ago.
  When he spoke 'twas like a lawyer reading word by word some will,
  Some blind jungle of a statement,--beating on and on until
  Out there leaps fierce life to fight with.

                          "This fell in my factor-days.
  Desk-drudge, slaving at Saint David's, one must game, or drink, or
      craze.
  I chose gaming: and,--because your high-flown gamesters hardly take
  Umbrage at a factor's elbow, if the factor pays his stake,--
  I was winked at in a circle where the company was choice,
  Captain This and Major That, men high of colour, loud of voice,
  Yet indulgent, condescending to the modest juvenile
  Who not merely risked, but lost his hard-earned guineas with a smile.

  "Down I sat to cards, one evening,--had for my antagonist
  Homebody whose name's a secret--you'll know why--so, if you list,
  Call him Cock o' the Walk, my scarlet son of Mars from head to heel!
  Play commenced: and, whether Cocky fancied that a clerk must feel
  Quite sufficient honour came of bending over one green baize,
  I the scribe with him the warrior, guessed no penman dared to raise
  Shadow of objection should the honour stay but playing end
  More or less abruptly,--whether disinclined he grew to spend
  Practice strictly scientific on a booby born to stare
  At--not ask of--lace-and-ruffles if the hand they hide plays fair,--
  Anyhow, I marked a movement when he bade me 'Cut!'

                                            "I rose.
  'Such the new manoeuvre, Captain? I'm a novice: knowledge grows.
  What, you force a card, you cheat, Sir?'

                            "Never did a thunder-clap
  Cause emotion, startle Thyrsis locked with Chloe in his lap,
  As my word and gesture (down I flung my cards to join the pack)
  Fired the man of arms, whose visage, simply red before, turned black.

  "When he found his voice, he stammered 'That expression once again!'

  "'Well, you forced a card and cheated!'

                          "'Possibly a factor's brain,
  Busied with his all important balance of accounts, may deem
  Weighing words superfluous trouble: cheat to clerkly ears may seem
  Just the joke for friends to venture: but we are not friends, you see!
  When a gentleman is joked with,--if he's good at repartee,
  He rejoins, as do I--Sirrah, on your knees, withdraw in full!
  Beg my pardon, or be sure a kindly bullet through your skull
  Lets in light and teaches manner to what brain it finds!
      Choose quick--
  Have your life snuffed out or, kneeling, pray me trim yon
      candle-wick!'

  "'Well, you cheated!'

  "Then outbroke a howl from all the friends around.
  To his feet sprang each in fury, fists were clenched and teeth
      were ground.
  'End it! no time like the present! Captain, yours were our disgrace!
  No delay, begin and finish! Stand back, leave the pair a space!
  Let civilians be instructed: henceforth simply ply the pen,
  Fly the sword! This clerk's no swordsman? Suit him with a pistol,
      then!
  Even odds! A dozen paces 'twixt the most and least expert
  Make a dwarf a giant's equal: nay, the dwarf, if he's alert,
  Likelier hits the broader target!'

                          "Up we stood accordingly.
  As they handed me the weapon, such was my soul's thirst to try
  Then and there conclusions with this bully, tread on and stamp out
  Every spark of his existence, that,--crept close to, curled about
  By that toying, tempting, teasing, fool-forefinger's middle joint,--
  Don't you guess?--the trigger yielded. Gone my chance! and at
      the point
  Of such prime success moreover: scarce an inch above his head
  Went my ball to hit the wainscot. He was living, I was dead.

  "Up he marched in flaming triumph--'twas his right, mind!--up, within
  Just an arm's length. 'Now, my clerkling,' chuckled Cocky, with a grin
  As the levelled piece quite touched me, 'Now, Sir Counting-House,
      repeat
  That expression which I told you proved bad manners! Did I cheat?'

  "'Cheat you did, you knew you cheated, and, this moment, know as well.
  As for me, my homely breeding bids you--fire and go to Hell!'

  "Twice the muzzle touched my forehead. Heavy barrel, flurried wrist.
  Either spoils a steady lifting. Thrice: then, 'Laugh at Hell who list,
  I can't! God's no fable either. Did this boy's eye wink once? No!
  There's no standing him and Hell and God all three against me,--so,
  I did cheat!'

  "And down he threw the pistol, out rushed--by the door
  Possibly, but, as for knowledge if by chimney, roof or floor,
  He effected disappearance--I'll engage no glance was sent
  That way by a single starer, such a blank astonishment
  Swallowed up their senses: as for speaking--mute they stood as mice.

  "Mute not long, though! Such reaction, such a hubbub in a trice!
  'Rogue and rascal! Who'd have thought it? What's to be expected next,
  When His Majesty's Commission serves a sharper as pretext
  For ... But where's the need of wasting time now? Naught requires
      delay:
  Punishment the Service cries for: let disgrace be wiped away
  Publicly, in good broad daylight! Resignation? No, indeed!
  Drum and fife must play the Rogue's-March, rank and file be free
      to speed
  Tardy marching on the rogue's part by appliance in the rear
  --Kicks administered shall right this wronged civilian,--never fear,
  Mister Clive, for--though a clerk--you bore yourself--suppose
      we say--
  Just as would beseem a soldier?

                      "'Gentlemen, attention--pray!
  First, one word!'

    "I passed each speaker severally in review.
  When I had precise their number, names, and styles, and fully knew
  Over whom my supervision thenceforth must extend,--why, then--

  "Some five minutes since, my life lay--as you all saw, gentlemen--
  At the mercy of your friend there. Not a single voice was raised
  In arrest of judgment, not one tongue--before my powder blazed--
  Ventured "Can it be the youngster plundered, really seemed to mark
  Some irregular proceeding? We conjecture in the dark,
  Guess at random,--still, for sake of fair play--what if for a freak,
  In a fit of absence,--such things have been!--if our friend
      proved weak
  --What's the phrase?--corrected fortune! Look into the case,
      at least!"
  Who dared interpose between the altar's victim and the priest?
  Yet he spared me! You eleven! Whosoever, all or each,
  To the disadvantage of the man who spared me, utters speech
  --To his face, behind his back,--that speaker has to do with me:
  Me who promise, if positions change, and mine the chance should be,
  Not to imitate your friend and waive advantage!'

                                    "Twenty-five
  Years ago this matter happened: and 'tis certain," added Clive,
  "Never, to my knowledge, did Sir Cocky have a single breath
  Breathed against him: lips were closed throughout his life, or since
      his death,
  For if he be dead or living I can tell no more than you.
  All I know is--Cocky had one chance more; how he used it,--grew
  Out of such unlucky habits, or relapsed, and back again
  Brought the late-ejected devil with a score more in his train,--
  That's for you to judge. Reprieval I procured, at any rate.
  Ugh--the memory of that minute's fear makes gooseflesh rise! Why prate
  Longer? You've my story, there's your instance: fear I did, you see!"

  "Well"--I hardly kept from laughing--"if I see it, thanks must be
  Wholly to your Lordship's candour. Not that--in a common case--
  When a bully caught at cheating thrusts a pistol in one's face,
  I should under-rate, believe me, such a trial to the nerve!
  'Tis no joke, at one-and-twenty, for a youth to stand nor swerve.
  Fear I naturally look for--unless, of all men alive,
  I am forced to make exception when I come to Robert Clive.
  Since at Arcot, Plassy, elsewhere, he and death--the whole world
      knows--
  Came to somewhat closer quarters."

                  Quarters? Had we come to blows,
  Clive and I, you had not wondered--up he sprang so, out he rapped
  Such a round of oaths--no matter! I'll endeavour to adapt
  To our modern usage words he--well, 'twas friendly license--flung
  At me like so many fire-balls, fast as he could wag his tongue.

  "You--a soldier? You--at Plassy? Yours the faculty to nick
  Instantaneously occasion when your foe, if lightning-quick,
  --At his mercy, at his malice,--has you, through some stupid inch
  Undefended in your bulwark? Thus laid open,--not to flinch
  --That needs courage, you'll concede me. Then, look here! Suppose
      the man,
  Checking his advance, his weapon still extended, not a span
  Distant from my temple,--curse him!--quietly had bade me, 'There!
  Keep your life, calumniator!--worthless life I freely spare:
  Mine you freely would have taken--murdered me and my good fame
  Both at once--and all the better! Go, and thank your own bad aim
  Which permits me to forgive you!' What if, with such words as these,
  He had cast away his weapon? How should I have borne me, please?
  Nay, I'll spare you pains and tell you. This, and only this,
      remained--
  Pick his weapon up and use it on myself. If so had gained
  Sleep the earlier, leaving England probably to pay on still
  Rent and taxes for half India, tenant at the Frenchman's will."

  "Such the turn," said I, "the matter takes with you? Then I abate
  --No, by not one jot nor tittle,--of your act my estimate.
  Fear--I wish I could detect there: courage fronts me, plain enough--
  Call it desperation, madness--never mind! for here's in rough
  Why, had mine been such a trial, fear had overcome disgrace.
  True, disgrace were hard to bear: but such a rush against God's face
  --None of that for me, Lord Plassy, since I go to church at times,
  Say the creed my mother taught me! Many years in foreign climes
  Rub some marks away--not all, though! We poor sinners reach
      life's brink,
  Overlook what rolls beneath it, recklessly enough, but think
  There's advantage in what's left us--ground to stand on, time to call
  'Lord, have mercy!' ere we topple over--do not leap, that's all!"

  Oh, he made no answer, re-absorbed into his cloud. I caught
  Something like "Yes--courage; only fools will call it fear."

                                      If aught
  Comfort you, my great unhappy hero Clive, in that I heard,
  Next week, how your own hand dealt you doom, and uttered just the word
  "Fearfully courageous!"--this, be sure, and nothing else I groaned.
  I'm no Clive, nor parson either: Clive's worst deed--we'll hope
      condoned.




MULÉYKEH.


  If a stranger passed the tent of Hóseyn, he cried "A churl's!"
  Or haply "God help the man who has neither salt nor bread!"
  --"Nay," would a friend exclaim, "he needs nor pity nor scorn
  More than who spends small thought on the shore-sand, picking pearls,
  --Holds but in light esteem the seed-sort, bears instead
  On his breast a moon-like prize, some orb which of night makes morn.

  "What if no flocks and herds enrich the son of Sinán?
  They went when his tribe was mulct, ten thousand camels the due,
  Blood-value paid perforce for a murder done of old.
  'God gave them, let them go! But never since time began,
  Muléykeh, peerless mare, owned master the match of you,
  And you are my prize, my Pearl: I laugh at men's land and gold!'

  "So in the pride of his soul laughs Hóseyn--and right, I say.
  Do the ten steeds run a race of glory? Outstripping all,
  Ever Muléykeh stands first steed at the victor's staff.
  Who started, the owner's hope, gets shamed and named, that day.
  'Silence,' or, last but one, is 'The Cuffed,' as we used to call
  Whom the paddock's lord thrusts forth. Right, Hóseyn, I say,
      to laugh!"

  "Boasts he Muléykeh the Pearl?" the stranger replies: "Be sure
  On him I waste nor scorn nor pity, but lavish both
  On Duhl the son of Sheybán, who withers away in heart
  For envy of Hóseyn's luck. Such sickness admits no cure.
  A certain poet has sung, and sealed the same with an oath,
  'For the vulgar--flocks and herds! The Pearl is a prize apart.'"

  Lo, Duhl the son of Sheybán comes riding to Hóseyn's tent,
  And he casts his saddle down, and enters and "Peace!" bids he.
  "You are poor, I know the cause: my plenty shall mend the wrong.
  'Tis said of your Pearl--the price of a hundred camels spent
  In her purchase were scarce ill paid: such prudence is far from me
  Who proffer a thousand. Speak! Long parley may last too long."

  Said Hóseyn, "You feed young beasts a many, of famous breed,
  Slit-eared, unblemished, fat, true offspring of Múzennem:
  There stumbles no weak-eyed she in the line as it climbs the hill.
  But I love Muléykeh's face: her forefront whitens indeed
  Like a yellowish wave's cream-crest. Your camels--go gaze on them!
  Her fetlock is foam-splashed too. Myself am the richer still."

  A year goes by: lo, back to the tent again rides Duhl.
  "You are open-hearted, ay--moist-handed, a very prince.
  Why should I speak of sale? Be the mare your simple gift!
  My son is pined to death for her beauty: my wife prompts 'Fool,
  Beg for his sake the Pearl! Be God the rewarder, since
  God pays debts seven for one: who squanders on Him shows thrift.'"

  Said Hóseyn, "God gives each man one life, like a lamp, then gives
  That lamp due measure of oil: lamp lighted--hold high, wave wide
  Its comfort for others to share! once quench it, what help is left?
  The oil of your lamp is your son: I shine while Muléykeh lives.
  Would I beg your son to cheer my dark if Muléykeh died?
  It is life against life: what good avails to the life-bereft?"

  Another year, and--hist! What craft is it Duhl designs?
  He alights not at the door of the tent as he did last time,
  But, creeping behind, he gropes his stealthy way by the trench
  Half-round till he finds the flap in the folding, for night combines
  With the robber--and such is he: Duhl, covetous up to crime,
  Must wring from Hóseyn's grasp the Pearl, by whatever the wrench.

  "He was hunger-bitten, I heard: I tempted with half my store,
  And a gibe was all my thanks. Is he generous like Spring dew?
  Account the fault to me who chaffered with such an one!
  He has killed, to feast chance comers, the creature he rode:
      nay, more--
  For a couple of singing-girls his robe has he torn in two:
  I will beg! Yet I nowise gained by the tale of my wife and son.

  "I swear by the Holy House, my head will I never wash
  Till I filch his Pearl away. Fair dealing I tried, then guile,
  And now I resort to force. He said we must live or die:
  Let him die, then,--let me live! Be bold--but not too rash!
  I have found me a peeping-place: breast, bury your breathing while
  I explore for myself! Now, breathe! He deceived me not, the spy!

  "As he said--there lies in peace Hóseyn--how happy! Beside
  Stands tethered the Pearl: thrice winds her headstall about his wrist:
  'Tis therefore he sleeps so sound--the moon through the roof reveals.
  And, loose on his left, stands too that other, known far and wide,
  Buhéyseh, her sister born: fleet is she yet ever missed
  The winning tail's fire-flash a-stream past the thunderous heels.

  "No less she stands saddled and bridled, this second, in case some
      thief
  Should enter and seize and fly with the first, as I mean to do.
  What then? The Pearl is the Pearl: once mount her we both escape."
  Through the skirt-fold in glides Duhl,--so a serpent disturbs no leaf
  In a bush as he parts the twigs entwining a nest: clean through,
  He is noiselessly at his work: as he planned, he performs the rape.

  He has set the tent-door wide, has buckled the girth, has clipped
  The headstall away from the wrist he leaves thrice bound as before,
  He springs on the Pearl, is launched on the desert like bolt from bow.
  Up starts our plundered man: from his breast though the heart be
      ripped,
  Yet his mind has the mastery: behold, in a minute more,
  He is out and off and away on Buhéyseh, whose worth we know!

  And Hóseyn--his blood turns flame, he has learned long since to ride,
  And Buhéyseh does her part,--they gain--they are gaining fast
  On the fugitive pair, and Duhl has Ed-Dárraj to cross and quit,
  And to reach the ridge El-Sabán,--no safety till that he spied!
  And Buhéyseh is, bound by bound, but a horse-length off at last,
  For the Pearl has missed the tap of the heel, the touch of the bit.

  She shortens her stride, she chafes at her rider the strange and
      queer:
  Buhéyseh is mad with hope--beat sister she shall and must,
  Though Duhl, of the hand and heel so clumsy, she has to thank.
  She is near now, nose by tail--they are neck by croup--joy! fear!
  What folly makes Hóseyn shout "Dog Duhl, Damned son of the Dust,
  Touch the right ear and press with your foot my Pearl's left flank!"

  And Duhl was wise at the word, and Muléykeh as prompt perceived
  Who was urging redoubled pace, and to hear him was to obey,
  And a leap indeed gave she, and evanished for evermore.
  And Hóseyn looked one long last look as who, all bereaved,
  Looks, fain to follow the dead so far as the living may:
  Then he turned Buhéyseh's neck slow homeward, weeping sore.

  And, lo, in the sunrise, still sat Hóseyn upon the ground
  Weeping: and neighbours came, the tribesmen of Bénu-Asád
  In the vale of green Er-Rass, and they questioned him of his grief;
  And he told from first to last how, serpent-like, Duhl had wound
  His way to the nest, and how Duhl rode like an ape, so bad!
  And how Buhéyseh did wonders, yet Pearl remained with the thief.

  And they jeered him, one and all: "Poor Hóseyn is crazed past hope!
  How else had he wrought himself his ruin, in fortune's spite?
  To have simply held the tongue were a task for boy or girl,
  And here were Muléykeh again, the eyed like an antelope,
  The child of his heart by day, the wife of his breast by night!"--
  "And the beaten in speed!" wept Hóseyn. "You never have loved
      my Pearl."




TRAY.


  Sing me a hero! Quench my thirst
  Of soul, ye bards!

                    Quoth Bard the first:
  "Sir Olaf, the good knight, did don
  His helm and eke his habergeon"...
  Sir Olaf and his bard--!

  "That sin-scathed brow" (quoth Bard the second),
  "That eye wide ope as though Fate beckoned
  My hero to some steep, beneath
  Which precipice smiled tempting death"...
  You too without your host have reckoned!

  "A beggar-child" (let's hear this third!)
  "Sat on a quay's edge: like a bird
  Sang to herself at careless play,
  And fell into the stream. 'Dismay!
  Help, you the standers-by!' None stirred.

  "Bystanders reason, think of wives
  And children ere they risk their lives.
  Over the balustrade has bounced
  A mere instinctive dog, and pounced
  Plumb on the prize. 'How well he dives!

  "'Up he comes with the child, see, tight
  In mouth, alive too, clutched from quite
  A depth of ten feet--twelve, I bet!
  Good dog! What, off again? There's yet
  Another child to save? All right!

  "'How strange we saw no other fall!
  It's instinct in the animal.
  Good dog! But he's a long while under:
  If he got drowned I should not wonder--
  Strong current, that against the wall!

  "'Here he comes, holds in mouth this time
  --What may the thing be? Well, that's prime!
  Now, did you ever? Reason reigns
  In man alone, since all Tray's pains
  Have fished--the child's doll from the slime!'

  "And so, amid the laughter gay,
  Trotted my hero off,--old Tray,--
  Till somebody, prerogatived
  With reason, reasoned: 'Why he dived,
  His brain would show us, I should say.

  "'John, go and catch--or, if needs be,
  Purchase--that animal for me!
  By vivisection, at expense
  Of half-an-hour and eighteenpence,
  How brain secretes dog's soul, we'll see!'"




A TALE.


  What a pretty tale you told me
    Once upon a time
  --Said you found it somewhere (scold me!)
    Was it prose or was it rhyme,
  Greek or Latin? Greek, you said,
  While your shoulder propped my head.

  Anyhow there's no forgetting
    This much if no more,
  That a poet (pray, no petting!)
    Yes, a bard, sir, famed of yore,
  Went where suchlike used to go,
  Singing for a prize, you know.

  Well, he had to sing, nor merely
    Sing but play the lyre;
  Playing was important clearly
    Quite as singing: I desire,
  Sir, you keep the fact in mind
  For a purpose that's behind.

  There stood he, while deep attention
    Held the judges round,
  --Judges able, I should mention,
    To detect the slightest sound
  Sung or played amiss: such ears
  Had old judges, it appears!

  None the less he sang out boldly,
    Played in time and tune,
  Till the judges, weighing coldly
    Each note's worth, seemed, late or soon,
  Sure to smile "In vain one tries
  Picking faults out: take the prize!"

  When, a mischief! Were they seven
    Strings the lyre possessed?
  Oh, and afterwards eleven,
    Thank you! Well, sir,--who had guessed
  Such ill luck in store?--it happed
  One of those same seven strings snapped.

  All was lost, then! No! a cricket
    (What "cicada?" Pooh!)
  --Some mad thing that left its thicket
    For mere love of music--flew
  With its little heart on fire,
  Lighted on the crippled lyre.

  So that when (Ah, joy!) our singer
    For his truant string
  Feels with disconcerted finger,
    What does cricket else but fling
  Fiery heart forth, sound the note
  Wanted by the throbbing throat?

  Ay, and ever to the ending,
    Cricket chirps at need,
  Executes the hand's intending,
    Promptly, perfectly,--indeed
  Saves the singer from defeat
  With her chirrup low and sweet.

  Till, at ending, all the judges
    Cry with one assent
  "Take the prize--a prize who grudges
    Such a voice and instrument?
  Why, we took your lyre for harp,
  So it shrilled us forth F sharp!"

  Did the conqueror spurn the creature,
    Once its service done?
  That's no such uncommon feature
    In the case when Music's son
  Finds his Lotte's power too spent
  For aiding soul-development.

  No! This other, on returning
    Homeward, prize in hand,
  Satisfied his bosom's yearning:
    (Sir, I hope you understand!)
  --Said "Some record there must be
  Of this cricket's help to me!"

  So, he made himself a statue:
    Marble stood, life-size;
  On the lyre, he pointed at you,
    Perched his partner in the prize;
  Never more apart you found
  Her, he throned, from him, she crowned.

  That's the tale: its application?
    Somebody I know
  Hopes one day for reputation
    Through his poetry that's--Oh,
  All so learned and so wise
  And deserving of a prize!

  If he gains one, will some ticket,
    When his statue's built,
  Tell the gazer "'Twas a cricket
    Helped my crippled lyre, whose lilt
  Sweet and low, when strength usurped
  Softness' place i' the scale, she chirped?

  "For as victory was nighest,
    While I sang and played,--
  With my lyre at lowest, highest,
    Right alike,--one string that made
  'Love' sound soft was snapt in twain,
  Never to be heard again,--

  "Had not a kind cricket fluttered,
    Perched upon the place
  Vacant left, and duly uttered
    'Love, Love, Love,' whene'er the bass
  Asked the treble to atone
  For its somewhat sombre drone."

  But you don't know music! Wherefore
    Keep on casting pearls
  To a--poet? All I care for
    Is--to tell him that a girl's
  "Love" comes aptly in when gruff
  Grows his singing. (There, enough!)

[Illustration: "HAIR, SUCH A WONDER OF FLIX AND FLOSS."]




GOLD HAIR.


  Oh, the beautiful girl, too white,
    Who lived at Pornic, down by the sea,
  Just where the sea and the Loire unite!
    And a boasted name in Brittany
  She bore, which I will not write.

  Too white, for the flower of life is red:
    Her flesh was the soft seraphic screen
  Of a soul that is meant (her parents said)
    To just see earth, and hardly be seen,
  And blossom in heaven instead.

  Yet earth saw one thing, one how fair!
    One grace that grew to its full on earth:
  Smiles might be sparse on her cheek so spare,
    And her waist want half a girdle's girth,
  But she had her great gold hair.

  Hair, such a wonder of flix and floss,
    Freshness and fragrance--floods of it, too!
  Gold, did I say? Nay, gold's mere dross:
    Here, Life smiled, "Think what I meant to do!"
  And Love sighed, "Fancy my loss!"

  So, when she died, it was scarce more strange
    Than that, when delicate evening dies,
  And you follow its spent sun's pallid range,
    There's a shoot of colour startles the skies
  With sudden, violent change,--

  That, while the breath was nearly to seek,
    As they put the little cross to her lips,
  She changed; a spot came out on her cheek,
    A spark from her eye in mid-eclipse,
  And she broke forth, "I must speak!"

  "Not my hair!" made the girl her moan--
    "All the rest is gone or to go;
  But the last, last grace, my all, my own,
    Let it stay in the grave, that the ghosts may know!
  Leave my poor gold hair alone!"

  The passion thus vented, dead lay she;
    Her parents sobbed their worst on that;
  All friends joined in, nor observed degree:
    For indeed the hair was to wonder at,
  As it spread--not flowing free,

  But curled around her brow, like a crown,
    And coiled beside her cheeks, like a cap,
  And calmed about her neck--ay, down
    To her breast, pressed flat, without a gap
  I' the gold, it reached her gown.

  All kissed that face, like a silver wedge
    'Mid the yellow wealth, nor disturbed its hair:
  E'en the priest allowed death's privilege,
    As he planted the crucifix with care
  On her breast, 'twixt edge and edge.

  And thus was she buried, inviolate
    Of body and soul, in the very space
  By the altar; keeping saintly state
    In Pornic church, for her pride of race,
  Pure life and piteous fate.

  And in after-time would your fresh tear fall,
    Though your mouth might twitch with a dubious smile,
  As they told you of gold, both robe and pall,
    How she prayed them leave it alone awhile,
  So it never was touched at all.

  Years flew; this legend grew at last
    The life of the lady; all she had done,
  All been, in the memories fading fast
    Of lover and friend, was summed in one
  Sentence survivors passed:

  To wit, she was meant for heaven, not earth;
    Had turned an angel before the time:
  Yet, since she was mortal, in such dearth
    Of frailty, all you could count a crime
  Was--she knew her gold hair's worth.

       *       *       *       *       *

  At little pleasant Pornic church,
    It chanced, the pavement wanted repair,
  Was taken to pieces: left in the lurch,
    A certain sacred space lay bare,
  And the boys began research.

  'Twas the space where our sires would lay a saint,
    A benefactor,--a bishop, suppose,
  A baron with armour-adornments quaint,
    Dame with chased ring and jewelled rose,
  Things sanctity saves from taint;

  So we come to find them in after-days
    When the corpse is presumed to have done with gauds
  Of use to the living, in many ways:
    For the boys get pelf, and the town applauds,
  And the church deserves the praise.

  They grubbed with a will: and at length--_O cor
    Humanum, pectora cæca_, and the rest!--
  They found--no gaud they were prying for,
    No ring, no rose, but--who would have guessed?--
  A double Louis-d'or!

  Here was a case for the priest: he heard,
    Marked, inwardly digested, laid
  Finger on nose, smiled, "There's a bird
    Chirps in my ear:" then, "Bring a spade,
  Dig deeper!"--he gave the word.

  And lo, when they came to the coffin-lid,
    Or rotten planks which composed it once,
  Why, there lay the girl's skull wedged amid
    A mint of money, it served for the nonce
  To hold in its hair-heaps hid!

  Hid there? Why? Could the girl be wont
    (She the stainless soul) to treasure up
  Money, earth's trash and heaven's affront?
    Had a spider found out the communion-cup,
  Was a toad in the christening-font?

  Truth is truth: too true it was.
    Gold! She hoarded and hugged it first,
  Longed for it, leaned o'er it, loved it--alas--
    Till the humour grew to a head and burst,
  And she cried, at the final pass,--

  "Talk not of God, my heart is stone!
    Nor lover nor friend--be gold for both!
  Gold I lack; and, my all, my own,
    It shall hide in my hair. I scarce die loth
  If they let my hair alone!"

  Louis-d'or, some six times five,
    And duly double, every piece.
  Now, do you see? With the priest to shrive,
    With parents preventing her soul's release
  By kisses that kept alive,--

  With heaven's gold gates about to ope,
    With friends' praise, gold-like, lingering still,
  An instinct had bidden the girl's hand grope
    For gold, the true sort--"Gold in heaven, if you will;
  But I keep earth's too, I hope."

  Enough! The priest took the grave's grim yield:
    The parents, they eyed that price of sin
  As if _thirty pieces_ lay revealed
    On the place _to bury strangers in_,
  The hideous Potter's Field.

  But the priest bethought him: "'Milk that's spilt'
    --You know the adage! Watch and pray!
  Saints tumble to earth with so slight a tilt!
    It would build a new altar; that, we may!"
  And the altar therewith was built.

  Why I deliver this horrible verse?
    As the text of a sermon, which now I preach:
  Evil or good may be better or worse
    In the human heart, but the mixture of each
  Is a marvel and a curse.

  The candid incline to surmise of late
    That the Christian faith proves false, I find;
  For our Essays-and-Reviews' debate
    Begins to tell on the public mind,
  And Colenso's words have weight:

  I still, to suppose it true, for my part,
    See reasons and reasons; this, to begin:
  'Tis the faith that launched point-blank her dart
    At the head of a lie--taught Original Sin,
  The Corruption of Man's Heart.




DONALD.


  Do you happen to know in Ross-shire
    Mount Ben ... but the name scarce matters:
  Of the naked fact I am sure enough,
    Though I clothe it in rags and tatters.

  You may recognise Ben by description;
    Behind him--a moor's immenseness:
  Up goes the middle mount of a range,
    Fringed with its firs in denseness.

  Rimming the edge, its fir-fringe, mind!
    For an edge there is, though narrow;
  From end to end of the range, a strip
    Of path runs straight as an arrow.

  And the mountaineer who takes that path
    Saves himself miles of journey
  He has to plod if he crosses the moor
    Through heather, peat, and burnie.

  But a mountaineer he needs must be,
    For, look you, right in the middle
  Projects bluff Ben--with an end in _ich_--
    Why planted there, is a riddle:

  Since all Ben's brothers little and big
    Keep rank, set shoulder to shoulder,
  And only this burliest out must bulge
    Till it seems--to the beholder

  From down in the gully,--as if Ben's breast,
    To a sudden spike diminished,
  Would signify to the boldest foot
    "All further passage finished!"

  Yet the mountaineer who sidles on
    And on to the very bending,
  Discovers, if heart and brain be proof,
    No necessary ending.

  Foot up, foot down, to the turn abrupt
    Having trod, he, there arriving,
  Finds--what he took for a point was breadth
    A mercy of Nature's contriving.

  So, he rounds what, when 'tis reached, proves straight,
    From one side gains the other:
  The wee path widens--resume the march,
    And he foils you, Ben my brother!

  But Donald--(that name, I hope, will do)--
    I wrong him if I call "foiling"
  The tramp of the callant, whistling the while
    As blithe as our kettle's boiling.

  He had dared the danger from boyhood up,
    And now,--when perchance was waiting
  A lass at the brig below,--'twixt mount
    And moor would he standing debating?

  Moreover this Donald was twenty-five,
    A glory of bone and muscle:
  Did a fiend dispute the right of way,
    Donald would try a tussle.

  Lightsomely marched he out of the broad
    On to the narrow and narrow;
  A step more, rounding the angular rock,
    Reached the front straight as an arrow.

  He stepped it, safe on the ledge he stood,
    When--whom found he full-facing?
  What fellow in courage and wariness too,
    Had scouted ignoble pacing,

  And left low safety to timid mates,
    And made for the dread dear danger,
  And gained the height where--who could guess
    He would meet with a rival ranger?

  'Twas a gold-red stag that stood and stared,
    Gigantic and magnific,
  By the wonder--ay, and the peril--struck
    Intelligent and pacific:

  For a red deer is no fallow deer
    Grown cowardly through park-feeding;
  He batters you like a thunderbolt
    If you brave his haunts unheeding.

  I doubt he could hardly perform _volte-face_
    Had valour advised discretion:
  You may walk on a rope, but to turn on a rope
    No Blondin makes profession.

  Yet Donald must turn, would pride permit,
    Though pride ill brooks retiring:
  Each eyed each--mute man, motionless beast--
    Less fearing than admiring.

  These are the moments when quite new sense,
    To meet some need as novel,
  Springs up in the brain: it inspired resource:
    --"Nor advance nor retreat but--grovel!"

  And slowly, surely, never a whit
    Relaxing the steady tension
  Of eye-stare which binds man to beast,--
    By an inch and inch declension,

  Sank Donald sidewise down and down:
    Till flat, breast upwards, lying
  At his six-foot length, no corpse more still,
    --"If he cross me! The trick's worth trying."

  Minutes were an eternity;
    But a new sense was created
  In the stag's brain too; he resolves! Slow, sure,
    With eye-stare unabated,

  Feelingly he extends a foot
    Which tastes the way ere it touches
  Earth's solid and just escapes man's soft,
    Nor hold of the same unclutches

  Till its fellow foot, light as a feather whisk,
    Lands itself no less finely:
  So a mother removes a fly from the face
    Of her babe asleep supinely.

  And now 'tis the haunch and hind-foot's turn
    --That's hard: can the beast quite raise it?
  Yes, traversing half the prostrate length,
    His hoof-tip does not graze it.

  Just one more lift! But Donald, you see,
    Was sportsman first, man after:
  A fancy lightened his caution through,
    --He wellnigh broke into laughter:

  "It were nothing short of a miracle!
    Unrivalled, unexampled--
  All sporting feats with this feat matched
    Were down and dead and trampled!"

  The last of the legs as tenderly
    Follows the rest: or never
  Or now is the time! His knife in reach,
    And his right hand loose--how clever!

  For this can stab up the stomach's soft,
    While the left hand grasps the pastern.
  A rise on the elbow, and--now's the time
    Or never: this turn's the last turn!

  I shall dare to place myself by God
    Who scanned--for he does--each feature
  Of the face thrown up in appeal to him
    By the agonising creature.

  Nay, I hear plain words: "Thy gift brings this!"
    Up he sprang, back he staggered,
  Over he fell, and with him our friend
    --At following game no laggard.

  Yet he was not dead when they picked next day
    From the gully's depth the wreck of him;
  His fall had been stayed by the stag beneath
    Who cushioned and saved the neck of him.

  But the rest of his body--why, doctors said,
    Whatever could break was broken;
  Legs, arms, ribs, all of him looked like a toast
    In a tumbler of port wine soaken.

  "That your life is left you, thank the stag!"
    Said they when--the slow cure ended--
  They opened the hospital door, and thence
    --Strapped, spliced, main fractures mended,

  And minor damage left wisely alone,--
    Like an old shoe clouted and cobbled,
  Out--what went in a Goliath wellnigh,--
    Some half of a David hobbled.

  "You must ask an alms from house to house:
    Sell the stag's head for a bracket,
  With its grand twelve tines--I'd buy it myself--
    And use the skin for a jacket!"

  He was wiser, made both head and hide
    His win-penny: hands and knees on,
  Would manage to crawl--poor crab--by the roads
    In the misty stalking season.

  And if he discovered a bothy like this,
    Why, harvest was sure: folk listened.
  He told his tale to the lovers of Sport:
    Lips twitched, cheeks glowed, eyes glistened.

  And when he had come to the close, and spread
    His spoils for the gazers' wonder,
  With "Gentlemen, here's the skull of the stag
    I was over, thank God, not under!"--

  The company broke out in applause;
    "By Jingo, a lucky cripple!
  Have a munch of grouse and a hunk of bread,
    And a tug, besides, at our tipple!"

  And "There's my pay for your pluck!" cried This,
    "And mine for your jolly story!"
  Cried That, while T'other--but he was drunk--
    Hiccupped "A trump, a Tory!"

  I hope I gave twice as much as the rest;
    For, as Homer would say, "within grate
  Though teeth kept tongue," my whole soul growled,
    "Rightly rewarded,--Ingrate!"

[Illustration: "AND FULL IN THE FACE OF ITS OWNER FLUNG THE GLOVE."]




THE GLOVE.

(PETER RONSARD _loipuitur_.)


  "Heigho," yawned one day King Francis,
  "Distance all value enhances!
  When a man's busy, why, leisure
  Strikes him as wonderful pleasure:
  'Faith, and at leisure once is he?
  Straightway he wants to be busy.
  Here we've got peace; and aghast I'm
  Caught thinking war the true pastime.
  Is there a reason in metre?
  Give us your speech, master Peter!"
  I who, if mortal dare say so,
  Ne'er am at a loss with my Naso,
  "Sire," I replied, "joys prove cloudlets:
  Men are the merest Ixions"--
  Here the King whistled aloud, "Let's
  --Heigho--go look at our lions!"
  Such are the sorrowful chances
  If you talk fine to King Francis.

  And so, to the courtyard proceeding
  Our company, Francis was leading,
  Increased by new followers tenfold
  Before he arrived at the penfold;
  Lords, ladies, like clouds which bedizen
  At sunset the western horizon.
  And Sir De Lorge pressed 'mid the foremost
  With the dame he professed to adore most.
  Oh, what a face! One by fits eyed
  Her, and the horrible pitside;
  For the penfold surrounded a hollow
  Which led where the eye scarce dared follow,
  And shelved to the chamber secluded
  Where Bluebeard, the great lion, brooded.
  The King hailed his keeper, an Arab
  As glossy and black as a scarab,
  And bade him make sport and at once stir
  Up and out of his den the old monster.
  They opened a hole in the wire-work
  Across it, and dropped there a firework,
  And fled: one's heart's beating redoubled;
  A pause, while the pit's mouth was troubled,
  The blackness and silence so utter,
  By the firework's slow sparkling and sputter;
  Then earth in a sudden contortion
  Gave out to our gaze her abortion.
  Such a brute! Were I friend Clement Marot
  (Whose experience of nature's but narrow,
  And whose faculties move in no small mist
  When he versifies David the Psalmist)
  I should study that brute to describe you
  _Illum Juda Leonem de Tribu_.

  One's whole blood grew curdling and creepy
  To see the black mane, vast and heapy,
  The tail in the air stiff and straining,
  The wide eyes, nor waxing nor waning,
  As over the barrier which bounded
  His platform, and us who surrounded
  The barrier, they reached and they rested
  On space that might stand him in best stead:
  For who knew, he thought, what the amazement,
  The eruption of clatter and blaze meant,
  And if, in this minute of wonder,
  No outlet, 'mid lightning and thunder,
  Lay broad, and, his shackles all shivered,
  The lion at last was delivered?
  Ay, that was the open sky o'erhead!
  And you saw by the flash on his forehead,
  By the hope in those eyes wide and steady.
  He was leagues in the desert already,
  Driving the flocks up the mountain,
  Or catlike couched hard by the fountain
  To waylay the date-gathering negress:
  So guarded he entrance or egress.
  "How he stands!" quoth the King: "we may well swear,
  (No novice, we've won our spurs elsewhere
  And so can afford the confession,)
  We exercise wholesome discretion
  In keeping aloof from his threshold,
  Once hold you, those jaws want no fresh hold,
  Their first would too pleasantly purloin
  The visitor's brisket or sirloin:
  But who's he would prove so foolhardy?
  Not the best man of Marignan, pardie!"

  The sentence no sooner was uttered,
  Than over the rails a glove fluttered,
  Fell close to the lion, and rested:
  The dame 'twas, who flung it and jested
  With life so, De Lorge had been wooing
  For months past; he sat there pursuing
  His suit, weighing out with nonchalance
  Fine speeches like gold from a balance.

  Sound the trumpet, no true knight's a tarrier!
  De Lorge made one leap at the barrier,
  Walked straight to the glove,--while the lion
  Ne'er moved, kept his far-reaching eye on
  The palm-tree-edged desert-spring's sapphire,
  And the musky oiled skin of the Kaffir,--
  Picked it up, and as calmly retreated,
  Leaped back where the lady was seated,
  And full in the face of its owner
  Flung the glove.

        "Your heart's queen, you dethrone her?
  So should I!"--cried the King--"'twas mere vanity,
  Not love, set that task to humanity!"
  Lords and ladies alike turned with loathing
  From such a proved wolf in sheep's clothing.

  Not so, I; for I caught an expression
  In her brow's undisturbed self-possession
  Amid the Court's scoffing and merriment,--
  As if from no pleasing experiment
  She rose, yet of pain not much heedful
  So long as the process was needful,--
  As if she had tried in a crucible,
  To what "speeches like gold" were reducible,
  And, finding the finest prove copper,
  Felt the smoke in her face was but proper;
  To know what she had _not_ to trust to,
  Was worth all the ashes and dust too.
  She went out 'mid hooting and laughter;
  Clement Marot stayed; I followed after,
  And asked, as a grace, what it all meant?
  If she wished not the rash deed's recallment?
  "For I"--so I spoke--"am a poet:
  Human nature,--behooves that I know it!"

  She told me, "Too long had I heard
  Of the deed proved alone by the word:
  For my love--what De Lorge would not dare!
  With my scorn--what De Lorge could compare!
  And the endless descriptions of death
  He would brave when my lip formed a breath,
  I must reckon as braved, or, of course,
  Doubt his word--and moreover, perforce,
  For such gifts as no lady could spurn,
  Must offer my love in return.
  When I looked on your lion, it brought
  All the dangers at once to my thought,
  Encountered by all sorts of men,
  Before he was lodged in his den,--
  From the poor slave whose club or bare hands
  Dug the trap, set the snare on the sands,
  With no King and no Court to applaud,
  By no shame, should he shrink, overawed,
  Yet to capture the creature made shift,
  That his rude boys might laugh at the gift,
  --To the page who last leaped o'er the fence
  Of the pit, on no greater pretence
  Than to get back the bonnet he dropped,
  Lest his pay for a week should be stopped.
  So, wiser I judged it to make
  One trial what 'death for my sake'
  Really meant, while the power was yet mine,
  Than to wait until time should define
  Such a phrase not so simply as I,
  Who took it to mean just 'to die.'
  The blow a glove gives is but weak:
  Does the mark yet discolour my cheek?
  But when the heart suffers a blow,
  Will the pain pass so soon, do you know?"

  I looked, as away she was sweeping,
  And saw a youth eagerly keeping
  As close as he dared to the doorway.
  No doubt that a noble should more weigh
  His life than befits a plebeian;
  And yet, had our brute been Nemean--
  (I judge by a certain calm fervour
  The youth stepped with, forward to serve her)
  --He'd have scarce thought you did him the worst turn
  If you whispered, "Friend, what you'd get, first earn!"
  And when, shortly after, she carried
  Her shame from the Court, and they married,
  To that marriage some happiness, maugre
  The voice of the Court, I dared augur.


                                THE END.




    Transcriber's Note:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible.

    There is no Number 8 in the list of books in "Every Boy's Library".

    Illustrations have been moved.

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.
    Bold text has been marked with =equals signs=.
    OE ligatures have been expanded.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pied Piper of Hamelin and Other
Poems, by Robert Browning

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN ***

***** This file should be named 42850-8.txt or 42850-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/8/5/42850/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Paul Clark and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
